Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control 155 (2023) 104738
Available online 7 September 2023
0165-1889/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contentslistsavailableat ScienceDirect
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jedc
A high-resolution, data-driven agent-based model of the housing 
market
BenceMér ˝oa,c,∗, AndrásBorsos a,b, ZsuzsannaHosszú a, ZsoltOláh a, NikolettVágó a
a Central Bank of Hungary, Krisztina körút 55, 1013 Budapest, Hungary
b Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Josefstädter Strasse 39, A-1080 Vienna, Austria
c Corvinus University of Budapest, F˝ovám tér 8, 1093 Budapest, Hungary
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
JEL classiﬁcation:
C63
D1
D31
E58
R21
R31
Keywords:
Agent-based modelling
Macroprudential policy
Housing market
Housing loans
This paper presents a complex, modular, 1:1 scale model of the Hungarian residential housing 
market. All of the 4 million households with their relevant characteristics and all of the ﬂats 
with detailed attributes like size, state and neighbourhood quality are represented, based on 
empirical micro-level data. The model features transactions in the housing and rental markets, 
a construction sector, buy-to-let investors, credit markets, house price dynamics, a procyclical 
banking sector regulated by a macroprudential authority and exogenous macroeconomic 
environment. While these features increase the complexity considerably, they also make it 
possible to surpass existing tools, most importantly in two aspects. First, the granularity of 
the model enables much higher resolution and heterogeneity in the results, and second, the 
detailed mapping to empirical data makes it possible to run the simulations in prompt time 
with only minimal burn-in eﬀects. Thus, the model enables the study of the impact of selected 
macroprudential, ﬁscal and monetary policies on the housing market in a more detailed and 
plausible way than in the case of the traditional analytical tools. After calibrating the model on 
Hungarian data, it managed to reproduce the key characteristics of the housing market even at 
disaggregated levels based on regions and the income deciles of the households. To demonstrate 
the model’s practicality, we also present two applications, assessing the impact of construction 
cost shocks and family support measures on the housing market.
1. Introduction
The housing market is one of the most fundamental segments of the economy with inﬂuence on the ﬁnancial position of house-
holds, investors, the construction sector and even on the stability of the banking system. Hence, disturbances on this market can have 
far-reaching economic and societal implications, which gives a special role to the housing market for policymakers.
However, there are also several characteristics of this market which make it diﬃcult to represent all of the relevant mechanisms 
and to obtain detailed policy assessments using the conventional toolkit of economics. The ﬁrst type of such complications involves 
relatively standard considerations in the literature, such as cyclical behaviour (Ceron and Suarez (2006), Cunningham and Kolet 
(2011)), interlacement with the ﬁnancial sector due to the typically highly leveraged transactions (Acharya and Richardson (2009), 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address:merob@mnb.hu(B.Mér ˝o).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedc.2023.104738
Received 12 October 2022; Received in revised form 22 August 2023; Accepted 4 September 2023

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
2
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Keys et al. (2013)), the illiquidity of real estate (especially in distressed periods) (Lin and Vandell (2007), Garriga and Hedlund 
(2020)), or the geographic fragmentation of the housing market (Goodman and Thibodeau (1998), Brueckner (1987)). However, 
there is also a second branch of diﬃculties not addressed suﬃciently in standard economic models, which arises from the high level 
of heterogeneity and non-linearity due to the many types of economic agents interacting simultaneously with diverse motivations and 
irrational expectations. These features result in a complex system, which is impossible to capture in a suﬃciently detailed manner 
without circumventing many of the typical assumptions of economic models.
This paper contributes to tackling these intricacies by proposing a novel modelling strategy, which is demonstrated using a 
complex, modular, 1:1 scale model of the Hungarian residential housing market. All of the 4 million households with their relevant 
characteristics and all of the ﬂats with detailed attributes are represented, based on empirical micro-level data. The model features 
transactions in the housing and rental markets, a construction sector, buy-to-let investors, credit markets, house price dynamics, 
a procyclical banking sector regulated by a macroprudential authority and an exogenous macroeconomic environment. Thus, the 
model enables the study of the impact of selected macroprudential, ﬁscal and monetary policies on the housing market in a uniquely 
detailed way.
1.1. Literature review
There are several papers in the mainstream literature that attempt to examine the housing market with more traditional tools, 
either using empirical econometric analysis (Kelly et al. (2018), Saunders and Tulip (2020), De Stefani (2021)) or DSGE models. In the 
latter case, the most typical strategy is to introduce the housing sector by considering housing as collateral for borrowing (Kiyotaki 
and Moore (1997), Iacoviello (2005)). As the size of the available loan depends on changes in property prices, it can also be inﬂuenced 
indirectly in these models by monetary policy shocks. There are also several DSGE models which consider the interactions between 
monetary policy and – usually macroprudential – measures that are more directly linked to house prices. Funke and Paetz (2012), 
Lambertini et al. (2013)and  Rubio and Carrasco-Gallego (2014)examine  the role of loan-to-value (LTV) regulations. Gelain and Bank 
(2011)expand  the scope of macroprudential instruments to leverage ratios, and Gelain et al. (2013)to  loan-to-income ratios as well. 
Furthermore, Kannan et al. (2012)emphasizes  the role of the underlying shock’s type in the determination of the optimal monetary 
and macroprudential policies, while Mendicino and Punzi (2014)and  Rubio and Comunale (2017)consider  two-economies settings 
in determining the optimal policy mix. There are also a few papers with DSGE models, in which the authors try to deviate somewhat 
from the usual assumptions in order to accommodate some of the above characteristics of the housing market. In the model of Kuang 
(2014)–  contrary to the rational expectation assumption – households are not aware of each other’s preferences and expectations, 
with this feature resulting in endogenously generated credit and house price cycles. Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2006)relaxed  another 
typical assumption by developing an equilibrium life-cycle model in which households are heterogeneous regarding their income 
and preferences, and are restricted by credit constraints. This setup has an impact on households’ savings, on the timing of house 
purchases, on the size of the purchased homes and ultimately on the volatility in house prices.
The introduction of bounded rationality and household heterogeneity are indeed important for the analysis of the housing market, 
but these extensions are only partial remedies to the shortcomings of DSGE models. The easiest way to represent more realistically 
the considerable heterogeneity of the agents and the complex behaviour of owners, renters, investors, banks and regulators is the use 
of agent-based models (ABMs).
The literature contains a large number of agent-based models suitable for analyzing the housing market. These are often macroe-
conomic ABMs with moderately elaborated housing markets. For example, Erlingsson et al. (2014)a n d Ozel et al. (2019)a r e both 
based on one of the most complex agent-based models at present, EURACE (see Deissenberg et al. (2008)), which makes it possible 
to analyze the interrelatedness of macroeconomic performance and ﬁnancial stability. In the same line of research, Lauretta (2018)
extends the model of Erlingsson et al. (2014)w i t h interactions between securitization and ﬁnancial innovations, while Kaszowska-
Mojsa and Pipie´n (2020) present an ABM tailored to the Polish economy with macroprudential applications. Fatouh et al. (2019)
builds a model for investigating the impact of quantitative easing on UK bank lending, including mortgage loans and exogenous 
data on housing stock and house prices. In connection with output and stability considerations, economic inequality can also be 
analyzed with general ABMs through the housing market; e.g. Cardaci (2018)demonstrates  that growing inequality is conducive to 
excessive indebtedness in home equity based loans, which can lead to higher default rates, credit crunches and eventually a decline 
in output.
There are also several “pure” housing market ABMs without a detailed macroeconomic environment. Some of these consider 
ﬁctive agents to demonstrate theoretical claims, while others attempt to mimic the entities and real estate of a real city or country. 
One of the ﬁrst papers in the former category is the model of Devisch et al. (2009), which elaborates ﬁctive agents’ housing decisions 
and the price negotiation process by using detailed utility functions. Magliocca et al. (2011) describes the housing market and the 
expansion of a ﬁctive city through the urbanization process of farmland areas. Ge (2014)and  Ge (2017)also  work without empirical 
data to study how the easing of the down payment requirement leads to endogenous bubbles with high volatility in property prices. 
Finally, Pangallo et al. (2019)a l s o build a simulation of a ﬁctive city and examine the connections between income inequality, 
segregation and house prices.
However, many research projects have recently been conducted on housing market ABMs based on empirical data. With this 
paper, we also attempt to contribute to this branch of the literature. The works most closely related to our research are Axtell 
et al. (2014)a n d Baptista et al. (2016). Axtell et al. (2014)m o d e l the housing market of Washington, D.C. and generate certain 
characteristics relying on the available data, most importantly all housing market transactions concluded between 1997 and 2009. 
This model could be scaled up to more than 2 million households in Washington D.C. and also features endogenously evolving

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
3
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
asset price bubbles. They conclude that a tighter interest rate policy reduces the size of the bubble only to a limited extent, while 
a tightening of leverage may have substantial eﬀect. This model was further developed and applied to the British housing market 
by Baptista et al. (2016). In this study, homes only diﬀer from each other in one characteristic, which can be regarded as a quality 
parameter. Households always buy the highest quality home on the market which is available within their reservation price. Cycles 
in this model are ampliﬁed by the decisions of buy-to-let investors. The paper examined the impact of a macroprudential instrument 
(the loan-to-income (LTI) limit) and found that the application of the LTI limit can mitigate housing market cycles. Cokayne (2019)
has used this model as a starting point to build a housing ABM calibrated to the Danish housing market. Furthermore, Laliotis et 
al. (2020)a l s o built a simpliﬁed version of Baptista et al. (2016)t o examine the eﬀects of the LTV regulation at the country-level 
within Europe. Catapano et al. (2021)proposed  a novel calibration method for the model of Baptista et al. (2016)with  Italian data. 
There are a few other papers featuring housing market ABMs based on empirical data. Gilbert et al. (2009) performed simulations 
using a model of buyers, sellers and real estate agents calibrated for the British housing market. Kouwenberg and Zwinkels (2015)
analyzed cyclical dynamics in the US housing market, modelling diﬀerent investment strategies. Carstensen (2015) examined the 
Danish housing market, while Glavatskiy et al. (2021) modelled the housing market of Sydney, utilizing many granular datasets 
for calibration. This was supplemented by spatial elements in Evans et al. (2021), which made it capable of testing price forecast 
predictions at the neighbourhood level. More recently, Carro et al. (2023)b u i l t a detailed model of the UK housing market, which 
they calibrated using several granular datasets, and analyzed the heterogeneous eﬀects of macroprudential policies with it. Tarne 
(2022)a l s o builds its housing market analysis on data from the UK and uses the model of Tarne et al. (2022)( w h i c h is based on 
Carro et al. (2023)and  Baptista et al. (2016)).
1.2. Innovations in modellingcapabilities
Our paper contributes to these endeavours by proposing a comprehensive model of the Hungarian housing market. Its central 
motive is to model transactions on the market in order to enable the detailed analysis of house price and housing loan dynamics. 
Since investors’ demand contributes to a large extent to the Hungarian housing market, not only purchasing but also renting is an 
integral part of our framework. This element is also essential to assess the accumulation of households’ savings, which is an important 
determinant of house purchases and housing lending. While these building blocks are common in many housing market ABMs, our 
model presents several new features and improvements compared to the existing practices in the literature. Among these the most 
important ones are the following.
Full-scale empirical mapping
As discussed above, several studies use empirical data to build and calibrate ABMs, but our approach takes a step forward by 
actually modelling all of the 4 million households and their ﬂats1 in Hungary at a 1:1 scale representation. The agents and their 
relevant characteristics are reconstructed by a comprehensive mapping of the households and the housing market to micro-level 
data from the Central Credit Information System, the Pension Payment database and transaction data on property sales collected 
by the National Tax and Customs Administration and the largest real estate agencies in Hungary. Furthermore, the model also 
considers detailed demographic trends and marital dynamics following empirical tendencies. Besides the higher level of plausibility 
in applications, this data-intensive framework has an additional beneﬁt of minimizing the burn-in eﬀect in the simulations.
Characteristics of ﬂats
Most of the papers consider only a single “quality” measure to quantify the desirability of ﬂats. By contrast, we characterize ﬂats 
by three attributes: size, state and location. While the size of ﬂats is straightforward to deﬁne, specifying the other two features is 
more arduous. In the case of state, we utilized several empirically observed traits which we compressed into a single, continuous 
variable using a hedonic regression model. Regarding location, we introduced two novel solutions: (i) we divided the country into 
actual, interpretable neighbourhoods instead of the typical grid-based or graph-based spatial representation of the housing market 
(which can be found in e.g. Gilbert et al. (2009), Ge (2017), Pangallo et al. (2019)or  Evans et al. (2021)); (ii) then – similarly to the 
procedure applied in the case of state– we assigned a cardinal quality measure to each neighbourhood as well.
Changes in the housing stock
The model also takes into account changes in the housing stock, which can happen in the form of (i) amortization, (ii) renovation,
and (iii) new constructions. The quality, i.e. the state, of ﬂats deteriorates at a predeﬁned rate, but in every month a random set 
of households can renovate their home. While – to our knowledge – renovations cannot be found in other housing market ABMs, 
constructions are sometimes modelled, but only for smaller urban areas (e.g. Magliocca et al. (2011), Ge (2017)), and not for a whole 
country. The construction sector in our model consists of one representative company, and it builds ﬂats with the highest possible 
state value. The location, size and quantity of new ﬂats are set by the construction sector based on simulated, ﬁctive demand (see 
A.2.2). The price of newly built ﬂats is determined by the price of the building site, the construction cost and the extra margin of 
new ﬂats.
1 For the sake of simplicity, we will use the word ﬂatto denote both ﬂats and houses.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
4
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Households’ decision-making process
Agents in the model can decide on moving not only at a certain age or at a predeﬁned time, but in any time period depending on 
their assessment of the potential utility gain. Households make oﬀers on ﬂats based on their consumer surplus calculated from the 
utility of the purchase expressed in monetary terms (in the spirit of Magliocca et al. (2011)). The higher this surplus is, the higher the 
probability and the size of an oﬀer will be. Before making an oﬀer, households also take into account the cost of renovation. In order 
to carry out these calculations, we assigned each household a utility function which was calibrated individually to their preferences 
based on empirical data about their actual homes. The feature of adding utility functions to the agents is only present in a handful of 
housing ABMs (e.g. Magliocca et al. (2011), Ge (2017), Pangallo et al. (2019)), and it is usually constructed in a Cobb-Douglas form. 
Our model, in turn, uses a composite utility function encompassing trade-oﬀs not only between housing and consumption, but also 
among the attributes of the ﬂats.
Credit market and the banking system
In order to prepare the model for conducting macroprudential analyses in a plausible manner, we incorporated several details 
of the credit market and the banking system, represented by one bank. First of all, the bank increases and reduces its credit supply 
procyclically. Furthermore, there are not only housing loans, but also bridge loans and personal loans. Housing loans can have either 
ﬁxed or variable rates. A household is eligible for a loan if (i) it meets the relevant LTV and DSTI (Debt Service to Income) rules; (ii) 
its expected income covers the credit payments and a minimal consumption level; (iii) and it did not have a defaulting loan in the 
past ﬁve years. If a household becomes non-performing, it will try to restructure the loan in order to meet its payment obligation. If 
this adjustment is not suﬃcient, foreclosure (and thus liquidation at a discount) of the ﬂats is also possible in the model.
Endogenous cycles
In agent-based models, house price cycles are usually caused by adaptive expectations. In Baptista et al. (2016)a n d Cokayne 
(2019), households are willing to spend more on housing when they expect house prices to increase, and expectations are backward 
looking. Moreover, in Baptista et al. (2016)buy-to-let  investors amplify the magnitude of cycles. Kouwenberg and Zwinkels (2015)
have agents with fundamental and chartist forecasting rules, and agents can switch between the forecasting strategies based on the 
prediction performance. The build-up of price bubbles occurs when the share of agents following adaptive rules (chartist strategy) 
increases. In this paper, investors use adaptive expectations, but we tried to enrich the literature with a novel, behaviourally founded 
mechanism in line with empirical ﬁndings in the case of owner occupiers. In the case of a tight housing market, typical households 
have to wait longer to ﬁnd and purchase a suitable ﬂat compared to normal market conditions. Hence, the longer they have been 
stranded on the market, the more tolerant they become regarding both the price and the characteristics of ﬂats. While this mechanism 
drives the prices upwards, plateauing will be inevitable as credit constraints become more and more binding, which limits the 
possibilities of households for purchasing using loans. Finally, after the impatient households have managed to buy at higher prices 
the tightness of the market relaxes.
While these features increase the complexity considerably, they also make it possible to surpass existing tools, most importantly in 
two aspects. First, the granularity of the model enables much higher resolution and heterogeneity in the results with high precision, 
and second, the detailed mapping to empirical data makes it possible to run the simulations in prompt time under the actual 
economic circumstances with only minimal burn-in eﬀects. In this way, our proposed framework is suitable for analyzing various 
types of macroprudential and ﬁscal policies, as well as for the assessment of exogenous shock scenarios. (However, in addition to 
this empirically designed model we also provide a version which uses only simulated data (see AppendixA.8) and therefore can be 
freely shared upon publication. We will refer to this version as the sample modelthroughout the paper.2)
1.3. Applications
To demonstrate the unique modellingcapabilities  of our framework, we show two interacting applications motivated by actual, 
policy-relevant situations in Hungary: the eﬀects of increased construction costs and family support policies on the housing market. 
(i) Starting from 2020, raw material costs in the construction sector started to shoot up at a rate greatly surpassing the increase in 
nominal wages,3 which seriously hampered the renewal of the housing stock. (ii) In 2016, the Hungarian government launched the 
Family Housing Support Programme (FHSP) with the dual objectives to subsidize home purchases for families which (plan to) have 
children and to stimulate the construction of new ﬂats, in order to increase the renewal rate of the housing stock. To accomplish 
these goals, families buying newly built ﬂats receive a state subsidy, the amount of which depends on the number of children. There 
are numerous similar programmes aimed at enhancing the output of the construction sector in other countries as well (Pawson et al. 
(2022)), however, the groups targeted by the subsidies can be diﬀerent, e.g. ﬁrst-time buyers, middle-income families, young adults, 
etc.
The quality and renewal rate of the housing stock have a considerable economic and societal inﬂuence in every country. Primarily, 
higher housing standards increase the well-being of the population; furthermore, newly built, or renovated and modernized ﬂats are 
more eﬃcient from the point of view of their energy consumption and thus have a smaller environmental footprint. According to some 
studies (Kaza et al. (2014), Guin and Korhonen (2020)), even the risk of non-performance is smaller for mortgage loans connected to 
2 The sample model code can be downloaded from the following git repository: https://github .com /mnbabm /housing -market -abm -sample.
3 This situation was further exacerbated in Hungary due to the depreciation of the Hungarian Forint and the high import share in the construction sector.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
5
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
ﬂats with higher energy eﬃciency due to the lower utility and maintenance costs. Construction cost shocks and subsidies of certain 
target groups have societal impacts not only via the change in the composition of the housing stock, but also via the change in house 
prices. An increase in prices makes house purchases more diﬃcult for those poorer households which are not eligible for the subsidy 
programme. This eﬀect increases the chance of impoverishment for these households and leads to higher inequality.
In most economic models which also represent the construction industry, cost shocks practically correspond to technological 
shocks. Moro and Nuño (2012)showed  that the surge in construction costs after 1997 in the US and in Germany were caused by the 
relative TFP decrease of the industry. Borri and Reichlin (2018)b u i l t a two-sector life cycle model with housing services, and they 
estimated the eﬀects of the increase in the relative labour-augmenting eﬃciency in manufacturing on housing wealth between 1970 
and 2010. Iacoviello and Neri (2010)built  a DSGE model with a housing and a non-housing sector, in which a positive technology 
shock in the housing sector leads to a fall in construction costs which is conducive to a rise in housing investment and a drop in 
housing prices. Most DSGE models with a housing market build on this latter model, but none has a special focus on shocks in the 
construction industry. The papers which investigate the impulse responses of a technological shock in the construction industry yield 
similar results (e.g. Lee and Song (2015), Ge et al. (2020), Ge et al. (2022)). Lambertini et al. (2017) enrich this framework by 
introducing shocks to expectations. This direction is motivated by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2012), who showed that anticipated 
shocks account for about one half of predicted aggregate ﬂuctuations in the USA. Mora-Sanguinetti and Rubio (2014)b u i l d on 
the model of Ortega et al. (2011), and they estimate the macroeconomic impacts of the VAT increase in the housing market of 
Spain. They found that this policy change decreases net house prices, and it has a negative eﬀect on output and employment in the 
construction sector. This application of our model contributes to the literature i) by taking into account many frictions on the housing 
market which can greatly inﬂuence the results (and are often not possible to consider in a DSGE framework); and ii) by showing the 
heterogeneity in the eﬀects of construction cost shocks on diﬀerent segments of the housing market based on the regional diﬀerences 
within a country and also considering the diﬀerent types of ﬂats.
Despite the fact that the FHSP has existed since 2016, there is no extended academic literature assessing its eﬃciency and impacts 
on the housing market. (As far as we know, the only paper is Plöchl and Obádovics (2021), which analyzed the diﬀerences in the 
conditions of the programme available in the diﬀerent segments of households.) The possible reasons for this could be that an 
evaluation of the FHSP is very diﬃcult, due to three aspects: (i) there were several changes in the parameters of the programme 
(additional tax reduction, special “village FHSP” extension, etc.); (ii) several other policies have been launched since 2016, which 
also focused on supporting families on the housing market (most importantly the prenatal baby support loan); and (iii) the interest 
rate environment became more and more favourable(until  2019) for purchases using housing loans.
Regarding the international literature, Pawson et al. (2022)gives  a detailed review of measures in diﬀerent developed countries, 
which were used to stimulate new housing construction and improve certain social groups’ (most importantly ﬁrst-time buyers) 
situation on the housing market. This study showed that these policies are often successful in increasing the demand for newly 
built ﬂats, but are less eﬀective in improving the aﬀordability and availability of such ﬂats. Especially in the case of very general 
programmes, the subsidies can be fully oﬀset by the increase in prices, which leads to higher proﬁt margins for the construction 
sector, but does not support households. Our results are in line with these experiences as we show that the FHSP causes signiﬁcantly 
higher demand for newly built ﬂats. Furthermore, since the expansion of output in the construction sector is limited by several factors 
in the short run (not only due to the building time), we also analyzed the role of capacity constraints in the market conditions. This 
line of examination was also supported by the severe labour shortage observed in the Hungarian construction sector from 2017, 
which left limited room for capacity expansion (MNB (2022), Fig. 23). We contribute to the literature with this application4 by (i) 
analyzing the role of capacity expansion constraints in the eﬀectiveness of a demand-stimulating housing market policy; (ii) showing 
the spillover eﬀects to the market of used ﬂats at a regional level; (iii) quantifying the social implications of the policy; and (iv) 
showing the extent to which the FHSP can mitigate the impact of the construction cost shocks introduced in the previous application.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a high-level overview of the model to facilitate the gen-
eral understanding. Section3highlights and exhaustively describes the most important features (while less emphasized details are 
delegated to the appendix). Section 4 concerns the calibration, validation and sensitivity analysis of the model. Section 5 presents 
the applications of the model focusing on construction cost shocks and subsidy policies. Section6 discusses the key contributions, 
proposes directions for future research and concludes the paper.
2. The model in a nutshell
We provide a general outline of the model by describing the agent types, reviewing the most important mechanisms and ﬁnally 
the timeline of the simulation steps. Readers interested in the ﬁner speciﬁcations of the model can consult Section3and AppendixA, 
while more detailed information on the generation of agents and their attributes from empirical data can be found in AppendixB.
2.1. Constituents of the model
The model incorporates (i) the population of individuals, households and ﬂats; (ii) a representative investor, a construction 
company and a bank; (iii) as well as authorities responsible for ﬁscal policies and macroprudential regulation (see Fig. 1). As the 
4 Since we did not model all the relevant policies happening in Hungary in this time period, and we only included the elements of the FHSP focusing on newly 
built ﬂat purchases, our results cannot be considered as a comprehensive, quantitative estimation for the eﬀects of the FHSP policy package.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
6
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 1. Schematicoutlineoftheagent-basedmodeloftheHungarianhousingmarket.
rules and parameters of the ﬁscal and macroprudential policies are given exogenously, we only provide a description of these in 
AppendixA.9(TableA.1).
2.1.1. Individuals and households
Every household in the model pursues having an own ﬂat, but as long as they cannot aﬀord this, they can only have a home 
via the rental market. If a household has a suﬃciently favourable ﬁnancial position, it cannot only own a home, but also additional 
ﬂats as investments. Although these transactions are carried out at the level of households in the model, the granularity of our 
framework goes even deeper by also representing the internal structure of almost 4 million households. These consist of either an 
individual adult or pairs of adults, possibly with children. The shifts between these conﬁgurations as well as the characteristics of 
the individuals within a household can fundamentally inﬂuence housing preferences. In this way, the concept of individuals and 
households are closely related, and thus, they are described jointly in this section.
We also represent several demographic phenomena of individuals and households in the model. Children after a certain age leave 
their parents’ household and start a new one, either alone or with a spouse. Newly formed married couples can also have children 
who will be part of the household. Although there is no divorce in the model,5 individuals age and pass away independently of 
their partners. While the time horizon of the model simulations typically only covers a few years, demographic events still have 
an important role. Starting from 2016, several subsidies were introduced in Hungary to support the purchase of ﬂats depending on 
the number of children in the family. These policies can materially ease credit constraints for the aﬀected families, because – in 
addition to the very favourable credit conditions – the subsidies can even be taken into account as part of the down payment. The 
two most important subsidy programmes are the FHSPand the Prenatal Baby Support Loan. While the former aﬀected 15-30% of the 
loan contracts (depending on the year), the latter can be connected to almost half of the non-housing loans issued since July 2019. 
The implications of these policies can only be taken into account accurately if one adds all of the relevant demographic processes 
into the model as well.
From the point of view of labour market status, each individual’s life has three stages: they are inactive at ﬁrst, then they enter 
the labour market (and become either employed or unemployed), and ﬁnally they retire. Members of a household can become 
unemployed independently of each other, and furthermore, external shocks can also aﬀect their salaries. The age of entering the 
labour market, the probability and length of unemployment and also the wage dynamics of individuals are determined by their 
educational level which is classiﬁed into three categories. At the age of retirement, pensioners receive a fraction of their last gross 
salary, which is corrected each year by the growth rate of nominal GDP. The details of generating the above mentioned characteristics 
and the life events of individuals and households from empirical data are described comprehensively in AppendixB.3.
5 The implementation of divorces is a possible future improvement. We partly substituted its consequences by the decision on moving when the oldest member of 
a household reaches a certain age (see A.4.4).

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
7
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
2.1.2. Flats
Although we do not observe all of the ﬂats in Hungary, we were still able to reconstruct an approximation of the housing stock 
by using several partial datasets. To ensure representativity, we multiplied these empirical observations using weights such that the 
distribution of the generated ﬂats would match the aggregate housing statistics in Hungary. The details of this procedure as well as 
the description of the empirical housing data can be found in AppendixB.1.
Each ﬂat in the model can be characterized by three attributes: size, state and location, which are represented by continuous 
variables. While this is straightforward in the case of the sizeof ﬂats, the other two variables had to be constructed by reducing the 
high-dimensional space of various characteristics of the ﬂats. In the case of the state, we compressed several empirically observed 
traits into one categorical variable according to which the ﬂats have been divided into 21 categories. Then, using a hedonic regression 
model it became possible to calculate a continuous quality measure for all of these groups (more details on this procedure can be 
found in Appendix B.1). Regarding the location of ﬂats, ﬁrst we divided the country into actual, interpretable neighbourhoods, of 
which 40 can be found in the capital and 84 cover the rest of the country. Then – similarly to the method applied in the case of 
state – we estimated a cardinal quality value for each neighbourhood as well. The main principle in this process was to divide the 
country as homogeneously as possible from the point of view of pricing, while keeping the number of observations suﬃciently high 
everywhere to be able to calculate neighbourhood-level price indices (more details on the creation of neighbourhoods can be found 
in B.1). Finally, ﬂats were grouped into buckets, which are deﬁned within each neighbourhood along sizeand stateintervals.
The model also incorporates three diﬀerent sources of change in the housing stock: (i) amortization, (ii) renovation,and (iii) new 
constructions. The stateof ﬂats deteriorates every month at a predeﬁned rate, which can be compensated by households by renovating 
their apartment. The construction of new ﬂats takes place by a representative company which builds ﬂats with the highest possible 
statevalue.
2.2. Description of the markets
2.2.1. Housing market
Demand
The demand side of the housing market features not only households, but also a representative investor and a construction 
company. These agents can have four distinct motivations for house purchases. (i) Young (ﬁrst-time buyer) households want to buy 
ﬂats to provide a dwelling for themselves. (ii) Secondly, households appear on the demand side again if they decide to move. This can 
happen if the oldest member of the household reaches a certain age, or the household ﬁnds another ﬂat which is suﬃciently closer 
to their optimal choice than their current home. First-time buyer households can choose between ﬂats in more than one region, but 
all other households can consider ﬂats only in their own regions6 (for further details of these mechanisms, see AppendixA.4.4and 
A.5.3). (iii) Thirdly, the construction sector is also present on the demand side of the market. In order to build new houses, a building 
site proportional to the size of the new ﬂats is required. For this, the construction sector purchases the cheapest ﬂats (based on 
the square meter unit price) in the neighbourhood (see AppendixA.5.1). (iv) Lastly, households and the representative professional 
investor might want to buy ﬂats to realize proﬁts on these investments. This type of demand is inﬂuenced by the potential increase 
in the ﬂats’ market value and the obtainable proﬁt from rents. Purchases for investment purposes generally happen in bucketswith 
excess demand. The introduction of the central investor was important in order to represent all of the entities whose decisions are not 
constrained by the Hungarian macroprudential rules, e.g. corporate investors (especially from abroad). Even if these actors are credit 
constrained, they are not inﬂuenced by the same limits Hungarian households are. Due to this asymmetry, LTV and DSTI regulation 
might be less eﬀective if the market is at least partly driven by investment activities. Apart from the susceptibility to Hungarian 
macroprudential policies, there is another aspect in respect of which we diﬀerentiate between the two types of investors. Buy-to-let 
households can only buy one ﬂat for investment purposes in a given period, and thus, the outcome of their behavioural rule is binary, 
while the central investor determines the sum it wants to invest in each period (more details on investment-motivated ﬂat purchases 
can be found in AppendixA.5.2).
Supply
The same agent types also appear on the supply side of the housing market. First of all, moving households can sell their previous 
homes. However, this step does not need to necessarily precede the purchase of a new ﬂat, owing to the opportunity of taking out a 
bridge loan. Additionally, ﬂats inherited after the death of relatives are also taken to the market (more details on inheritance can be 
found in AppendixA.3.1). Flats purchased for investment purposes can also be placed on the market if the expected yield falls. This 
can happen due to a decline in house prices, or in the case of excess supply in a given bucket (for further details, see AppendixA.7). 
Finally, the construction sector also sells new ﬂats already during the construction period.
Pricing
Households make oﬀers on one or more ﬂats after evaluating them based on the available consumer surplus of the purchase. This 
is calculated using the utility functions of households which are calibrated individually to their preferences from empirical data on 
their actual homes (see details on the calibration of the utility functions in AppendixB.5). The utility function takes into account the 
6 Regionsin the model correspond to the 7 (+Budapest) NUTS 2 regions of Hungary.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
8
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
three above described characteristics, size, stateand location, as well as the ﬁnancial situation of the household, and assigns a value 
– expressed in monetary terms – to each ﬂat (the exact formulation can be found in AppendixA.4.2).
In the process of bidding, potential buyers choose a “perfect” ﬁctive ﬂat and can then place bids on multiple ﬂats. The closer a 
ﬂat’s consumer surplus is to the surplus of this ideal ﬁctive ﬂat, the higher the probability and the size of the oﬀer will be.7 The 
exact size of a household’s oﬀer is the weighted average of the reservation price and the market price. In the case of a tight housing 
market, households have to wait longer to ﬁnd and purchase a suitable ﬂat compared to normal market conditions. The longer they 
have been stranded on the market, the more tolerant they become regarding both the price and the characteristics of ﬂats (see details 
in AppendixA.4.2). On the other side of the transactions, sellers determine the market unit price of a ﬂat by taking the two closest, 
recently sold ﬂats in the neighbourhood. Every month, the sellers set the ask price as a decreasing fraction of the market price (see 
details in AppendixA.2.1). At the end of the bidding process, the highest bidder can buy the ﬂat at the price of the second highest 
bid (i.e. by Vickrey auction),8 or at the market price if there is only one bidder. If a household buys a ﬂat, all of the other oﬀers of 
this household are withdrawn.
2.2.2. Credit market
The model features ﬁxed and variable rate housing loans which can be used by the households to buy either their own homes 
or ﬂats for investment purposes, provided that they have suﬃcient savings and stable income. In this way, the size of the approved 
loans signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the oﬀers households can make on the market. In the case of moving, households can also take out 
bridge loans; moreover, there are also personal loans to be used for renovation.
Apart from bridge loans, households’ eligibility depends on three types of requirements: (i) macroprudential policy rules (i.e. LTV 
and DSTI regulations); (ii) the bank’s own conditions regarding a minimum consumption level (i.e. the household’s expected income 
must cover the credit payments and a minimal consumption level); (iii) and ﬁnally, a household is only eligible if it did not have a 
defaulting loan in the past ﬁve years.9
The interest rate of a newly issued loan is calculated as the sum of the base rate and a spread. The bank determines the credit 
spreads with a regression model where the coeﬃcients are estimated on actual empirical data (Appendix B.4). Furthermore, the 
credit supply of the bank also depends on macroeconomic factors, which leads to procyclical behaviour on the credit market.
Since the members of a household can experience unemployment or their income dynamics can be diverted by exogenous shocks, 
loans of the distressed agents might become temporarily or even permanently non-performing. In these situations, the bank ﬁrst tries 
to restructure the loan in order to meet their payment obligation. If the payments can still not cover the interest calculated after the 
outstanding principal, we account a loss for the bank. If the household is continuously unable to deliver the restructured monthly 
instalment, the collateral will be liquidated at a discounted price.
The credit market is discussed in more detail in AppendixA.6.
2.2.3. Rental market
Flats can be placed on the rental market by the representative investor or buy-to-let households. We distinguish in the model 
between short-term (one period) and long-term renting. The short-term market segment is meant to represent the inﬂuence of 
online marketplace platforms (e.g. Airbnb), which mostly serve demand coming from tourism. We represent this phenomenon by 
introducing time-dependent, exogenously given external demand for every bucket based on empirical data. (That is, this factor is 
completely independent of the preferences of the households.) This type of short-term renting is very concentrated geographically, as 
mostly only the inner districts of Budapest are aﬀected by it directly. The increased amount of purchases for investment purposes in 
this area led to an upsurge in real estate prices in 2018 and 2019; furthermore, as these ﬂats have been mostly utilized for short-term 
renting, the rental prices also skyrocketed due to the massive outﬂow of ﬂats from the long-term rental segment (Boros et al. (2018)).
Long-term renting corresponds to the traditional interpretation of the rental housing market. If a household does not have an own 
home, but needs a separate ﬂat to live in, it can go to the long-term rental market.10 Firstly, households look through the vacant ﬂats 
in the rental market in their preferred region. Choosing between the ﬂats occurs similarly to the manner described for purchases: 
households select the ﬂat with the highest consumer surplus calculated as the diﬀerence between the rental reservation price (coming 
from households’ utility functions) and the rental fee. After expiration of the rental contracts, households either try to buy an own 
ﬂat, or they can look at the rental market again. In the rental market there is no bidding process. Households come sequentially in a 
random order and they rent out the chosen ﬂat for the ask rental price.
For further details, see AppendixA.7.
7 Before making an oﬀer, households also take into account the cost of renovation.
8 While it is obvious that potential buyers in this case do not have full knowledge of all the bids – which would be a necessary condition for a plausible Vickrey 
auction design, this solution still has the very useful feature that under tight market conditions both the highest and the second highest bids will be very close to the 
ask price, but in the case of a loose market the gap between the bids will be larger, representing the potential for bargaining (this mechanism is otherwise not present 
in the model).
9 The third type of requirement is based on the fact that banks can obtain the credit history of potential clients via the Central Credit Registry.
10 Households in the model always try to purchase an own home. They only turn to the rental market if they do not succeed in doing so. The main justiﬁcation for 
this assumption is that Hungarian households have a very strong preference for owning their homes. More than 90% of Hungarian households live in their own ﬂat, 
and young households also pursue this strategy.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
9
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
2.3. Timeline of events
Our model simulations run through several periods, each of which represents a one-month time interval. One period consists of 
the following steps: (i) updating individuals and their characteristics, (ii) updating the market environment, (iii) transactions in the 
housing market, (iv) updating the housing stock, (v) updating the rental market, and (vi) accounting of money ﬂows. The following 
subsections give a schematic overview of the events occurring in each of these blocks of the simulations.
2.3.1. Updating individuals and their characteristics
•L i f e events of individuals
– Individuals age and die (with a probability depending on their characteristics).
– Young adults leave their parents’ household and start their own households.
– If there are no more adults in a household, the ﬂat will be inherited.
– Individuals marry and create new households. The selection of a spouse is determined based on data from the Central Credit 
Registry.
– Children are born in selected households. Children inherit the characteristics of their parents.
•T h e labour market status of individuals
– Wages are updated. Wages depend on individuals’ educational level, work experience and on the nominal GDP index.
– Individuals become (un)employed and retired.
– The lifetime income of individuals is updated.
2.3.2. Updating the market environment
•F l a t s ’ market price is updated.
•H o u s e h o l d s decide on moving. (If they have been trying to move for a certain amount of time, but were not able to sell their 
own ﬂat, they withdraw from buying a new ﬂat.)
•T h e state of the ﬂats deteriorates.
•F l a t s with expiring rental contracts become empty.
•T h e expected return is calculated on housing market investments in each neighbourhood.
•R e n t a l market mark-up is calculated in each neighbourhood based on the respective vacancy rates.
•T h e construction sector’s mark-up is calculated in each neighbourhood.
•T h e central investor determines the investment amount for each neighbourhood, and the investment probabilities for each 
bucket within the neighbourhoods.
•T h e probability of selling is calculated in each bucket in the case of ﬂats owned for rental purposes (based on the expected return 
and the vacancy rate).
• Collecting the ﬂats to be sold and calculating their ask prices
– The construction sector places (or keeps) its ﬂats to be sold on the market.
– Empty ﬂats owned for investment purposes are placed (or kept) on the market, according to a given probability.
– Households place (or keep) their inherited ﬂats on the market.
– Movers place (or keep) their previous ﬂats on the market.
• Assessing households’ housing preferences by ﬁctive ﬂats
– Fictive ﬂats are generated (with realistic market prices).
– Every potential buyer chooses a ﬁctive ﬂat which she would buy if it was an existing ﬂat on the market. (This information 
is used as a reference for households’ actual purchases; furthermore, the construction sector estimates the demand for newly 
built ﬂats in each neighbourhood based on the ﬁctive demand.)
2.3.3. Transactions in the housing market
•T h e construction sector determines the number of ﬂats it wishes to build in each bucket, and it buys ﬂats (at their market price) 
in the corresponding neighbourhoods to ensure the necessary building sites.
•T h e central investor buys ﬂats in each neighbourhood (if there are available ﬂats) until it reaches the planned investment 
amount.
• Each household attempts to invest with a given probability: We randomly assign them a neighbourhood (based on the size and 
the tightness of the rental market in the given neighbourhood) and then a bucket, in which we examine if there is a ﬂat for sale 
which is possible to buy for the given household.
• Purchases of occupant owners take place in multiple rounds (where some of the households might not succeed on the market 
even after the last round). One round consists of the following steps:
– Potential buyers evaluate the list of ﬂats for sale and place unique bids (oﬀers) on some of them.
– If there is at least one valid oﬀer for a ﬂat, the household with the highest bid purchases the ﬂat (at the price of the second 
highest bid, or at the market price if there is only one oﬀer).
– Sold ﬂats are deleted from the list of ﬂats for sale and buyers are removed from the list of potential buyers.
2.3.4. Updating the housing stock
•T h e construction sector continues with the building of ongoing projects.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
10
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 1
𝑅2 of the hedonic price regression with 
diﬀerent sets of ﬂat attributes.
Flatcharacteristics R^2
Originalestimation 0.84
Without“state” 0.75
Without“size” 0.54
Without“neighbourhood” 0.27
• Renovation
– A random fraction of the households (and those which recently purchased a ﬂat) decide on the extent to which they wish to 
renovate their ﬂats.
– Households pay the costs the renovation (they can take out a loan for this if it is necessary), and the state of the ﬂats improves 
instantaneously.
2.3.5. Updating the rental market
• Assessing households’ renting preferences by ﬁctive ﬂats
– Fictive ﬂats are generated (with realistic rental prices).
– Every potential renter chooses a ﬁctive ﬂat which she would rent if it was an existing ﬂat on the market. (This information is 
used to estimate the rental demand in each bucket in the next period, which determines the activity of investors.)
•T h e available (empty) ﬂats for rent are collected (and their rental price is also generated).
•S h o r t - t e r m renting: According to the exogenous demand, some of the available ﬂats become rented out for one month in each 
bucket.
•L o n g - t e r m renting: Every potential renter chooses a ﬂat which is still available and moves there for a given number of periods.
2.3.6. Accounting of money ﬂows
• Individuals receive their wages.
•R e n t e r s pay the rental fee.
•H o u s e h o l d s determine and spend the amount allocated for consumption.
•R e p a y m e n t of loans
– Households pay monthly instalments.
– If they cannot pay, the loan in question becomes non-performing.
– After a certain time, the bank tries to restructure non-performing loans.
– If a loan is still non-performing even after restructuring, the collateral will be liquidated. (Liquidation starts in the next period.)
– Non-performing loans can become re-performing if the debtor household can resume the payment of the full monthly instal-
ment again.
– After paying the last instalment, the loan ceases to exist.
•T h e interest rate of adjustable-rate loans may change. The new amount of instalment is applied from the next period.
•H o u s i n g market price indices are calculated.
•T h e average price of building sites is calculated.
3. Highlighted features of the model
This section presents several simulation results which provide justiﬁcation for the unique features and the most important as-
sumptions of the model.
3.1. Characteristics of ﬂats
In the model, every ﬂat has three attributes: size, state and location. While the size is constant over time (as it does not change 
even due to renovation), the stateis time-variant, i.e. it changes with depreciation and renovation. If it remained unchanged, it would 
be impossible to model decisions about renovations. Furthermore, we assume that the neighbourhood quality characterizing each 
locationis constant over time, but this decision about time-invariance is not that obvious in this case. For example, Ge (2017)u s e s 
the residents’ income position to model this characteristic dynamically. In this paper, the ranking of neighbourhoods could vary over 
time if some neighbourhoods become more popular. However, these processes usually take several years, which is far longer than 
the typical time horizon simulated in our model.
According to the results of our hedonic price regressions described in AppendixB.1, all of these attributes are highly signiﬁcant, 
and they increase the goodness-of-ﬁt considerably. To illustrate this, Table1shows the 𝑅2 values if we used just two of the three ﬂat 
features:
These results also suggest the outstanding importance of our neighbourhood quality variable. As described in detail in Ap-
pendixB.1, our strategy regarding the formation of the neighbourhoods aims at creating a partition of the country which represents

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
11
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 2
𝑅2 of the hedonic price regression 
with diﬀerent location variables.
Locationcategories R^2
None 0.27
Region 0.66
Counties 0.67
Neighbourhoods 0.84
an optimal trade-oﬀ between minimizing the fragmentation of the data and maximizing the homogeneity within the categories.11
Our data-driven solution for this is unique in the literature, and it has the advantage that house prices indirectly contain all relevant 
information on the location (public transportation, health and education institutions, residents’ income situation, etc.).
Table 2 shows the performance of our neighbourhood-level location variable compared to more coarse-grained options in the 
price regression estimation. According to these results, the estimation’s 𝑅2 decreases considerably if we use administrative location 
categories (such as regions or counties), instead of our approach.
3.2. Households’ decision making-process
During their decision-making process about moving, households choose the ﬂat with the highest consumer surplus (which is not 
necessarily the ﬂat with the best quality) according to standard utility maximization theory. In order to do this, each household 
in the model has a reservation price function which assigns a utility to ﬂats expressed in monetary terms; hence, for the sake of 
simplicity we call it a utility function (details on the exact form of this function and the decision-making process can be found in 
AppendixA.4.2and AppendixA.4.4).
Since standard functional forms in consumer theory are used in a diﬀerent spirit, we did not constrain ourselves to a CES design; 
instead, we investigated alternative forms which meet the following requirements: (i) the reservation price function is continuous; 
(ii) the reservation price is a monotonically increasing function of a household’s lifetime income, and of the size (𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓), state (𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑓) 
and neighbourhood quality (𝑄𝑁𝑓) of a given ﬂat 𝑓; (iii) the second derivatives with respect to 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓 and 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑓 are negative.
We selected six diﬀerent options, which diﬀer either regarding their fundamental type (Cobb-Douglas, CES, exponential or sigmoid 
function), or whether they handle ﬂat characteristics and the households’ lifetime income (𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ) in an additive or a multiplicative way.
• Cobb-Douglas:
𝑈𝑙
ℎ =𝛿ℎ ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝛼ℎ
𝑓 ×𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝛽ℎ
𝑓 ×𝑄1−𝛼ℎ−𝛽ℎ
𝑁𝑓
×𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ (1)
• Cobb-Douglas–Sigmoid:
𝑈𝑙
ℎ =𝛿ℎ ×
(
𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝛼ℎ
𝑓 ×𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒1−𝛼ℎ
𝑓 + 𝐾ℎ
(1+ 𝑒
−𝑄𝑁𝑓 )1∕𝛾ℎ
)
×𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ (2)
•C E S :
𝑈𝑙
ℎ =𝛿ℎ ×
[
𝛼ℎ ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒−𝛽ℎ
𝑓 +𝛾ℎ ×𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒−𝛽ℎ
𝑓 +(1− 𝛼ℎ −𝛾ℎ)× 𝑄−𝛽ℎ
𝑁𝑓
]−1∕𝛽ℎ
×𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ (3)
• CES–Sigmoid:
𝑈𝑙
ℎ =𝛿ℎ ×
[(
𝛼ℎ ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒−𝛽ℎ
𝑓 +(1− 𝛼ℎ)× 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒−𝛽ℎ
𝑓
)−1∕𝛽ℎ
+ 𝐾ℎ
(1+ 𝑒
−𝑄𝑁𝑓 )1∕𝛾ℎ
]
×𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ (4)
• Exponential with additive size and state variables:
𝑈𝑙
ℎ =
(
𝑐_𝑚ℎ ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝛽𝑚
ℎ
𝑓 +𝑐_𝑎ℎ ×𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝛽𝑎
ℎ
𝑓 + 𝐾ℎ
(1+ 𝑒
−𝑄𝑁𝑓 )1∕𝛾ℎ
)
×𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ (5)
• Exponential with multiplicative size and state variables:
𝑈𝑙
ℎ =
(
𝑐_𝑚ℎ ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝛽𝑚
ℎ
𝑓 ×( 1+𝑐_𝑎ℎ)× 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝛽𝑎
ℎ
𝑓 + 𝐾ℎ
(1+ 𝑒
−𝑄𝑁𝑓 )1∕𝛾ℎ
)
×𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ (6)
To determine the best candidate, we tested the six diﬀerent functions in the following way. We calibrated the six reservation price 
functions for 1,000 randomly sampled households by ﬁnding the parameter set for each household and for each function, with which 
11 We formed 124 neighbourhoods with 80,000 inhabitants each on average.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
12
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 3
Calibration performance of diﬀerent reservation price functions.
Perfect
match
(d=0)
Successful
calibrations
(d<=0.1)
Successful
calibrations
(d<=0.2)
Successful
calibrations
(d<=0.3)
Number
of
parameters
A*X^B+sigmoid
(multiplicative)
80 159 562 845 6
A*X^B+sigmoid
(additive)
45 103 400 700 6
CES+sigmoid 19 36 104 249 5
CES 26 55 286 587 4
CD+sigmoid 85 161 498 713 4
CD 85 150 510 778 3
we can obtain the highest consumer surplus for exactly the ﬂat that the given household owns in reality (or for one which is very 
similar to it). (Details of this calibration procedure are described in Appendix B.5.) We assessed the goodness of the six functions 
based on their success rate in this exercise.12
While Cobb-Douglas functions are the most widely used in the economic literature, and the more general CES functions are very 
popular in consumption theory, we can see in Table3that the exponential functional forms actually perform better, especially with 
multiplicative interaction between size and state. Additionally, we can also observe in the case of the CD and CES results, that in this 
non-linear, non-convex optimization problem more parameters do not necessarily yield better performance.
3.3. Construction sector
In the existing housing market ABMs, the construction sector is either not modelled at all (Laliotis et al. (2020)), or it is included 
only to a limited extent. For instance, Erlingsson et al. (2014) represented the construction sector merely as one of the industries 
producing homogenous housing units, and Baptista et al. (2016)u s e d this sector only during the burn-in phase to accumulate the 
suﬃcient housing stock which remained constant afterwards in the model simulation. We decided to model the construction sector 
in a more detailed manner, due to the following considerations:
• Prices and therefore the build-up of bubbles on the housing market can be substantially inﬂuenced by the construction sector. 
On the one hand, exogenous or endogenous labour and material cost shocks fundamentally determine the price of newly built 
houses, which trickles down to the market of used ﬂats as well. On the other hand, the increase in prices driven by excessive 
demand can be oﬀset by the construction sector if it builds houses in the right segments of the market. However, the eﬀectiveness 
of this mechanism is highly dependent on the time requirement of construction and the availability of the necessary capacities. 
While the above mentioned papers acknowledge and somewhat utilize the construction sector as a means to adjust the housing 
stock, the constraints on building new housing stock after demand shocks on the market have not been taken into account so 
far.
•O u r model features demographic phenomena such as declining birth numbers and migration within the country. These mecha-
nisms have heterogeneous implications across regions, which results in diﬀerent dynamics on the local housing markets. Thus, 
the assumption of time-invariant market conditions would lead to more and more distorted results as the time span of the simu-
lation increases. To ensure the ﬂexibility which is required to handle these processes from an economic point of view, one also 
needs to elaborate the mechanisms responsible for the adaptability of the market.
•A s a more practical consideration, we would like our model to be applicable for the analysis of the most recent tendencies in 
economic policy-making as well. Since 2016, vast amounts of resources have been allocated to subsidizing Hungarian families’ 
home purchases. At ﬁrst, these programmes focused on newly built ﬂats, but later transactions with used ﬂats were also targeted. 
The most important elements of these subsidies are direct money transfers and very favourable loan constructions, within the 
framework of which some subsidized loans could even be accounted as part of the down payment of the housing loans. These 
policies strongly aﬀected not only the housing loan markets, but also the housing market via several channels. To capture the 
implications in a plausible manner, a detailed representation of the construction sector is necessary in the model.
The importance of the construction sector is also reﬂected by the fact that in the 2018-2019 period 13% of the transactions on 
the Hungarian market involved newly built ﬂats, which accounts for the renewal of 0.4-0.5% (depending on the year) of the total 
housing stock in the country. Furthermore, the amount of subsidies in the same period were equal to 7% of the newly issued loans.
12 The success rate is deﬁned in the following way: We calculate 𝑑, which is the maximum of the percentage diﬀerences between two ﬂats’ price, size, state value 
and neighbourhood quality score, and we minimize the value of this function during the parameter search. We consider the calibration successful if the value of the 
objective function is less than 𝑑%. (The zero value implies that the household picked the same ﬂat after the optimization as it did in reality.)

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
13
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 4
Model simulation results for diﬀerent model sizes.
Numberofindividuals 500,000 50,000
Avg.houseprices(millionHUF) 21.1 15.2
Housepriceautocorrelation 0.94 0.04
Avg.#oftransactionspermonth 955 33
Transactionnumberautocorrelation 0.77 0.33
Ratiooftransactions/individuals 0.19% 0.07%
Ratiooftransactions/ﬂatsforsale 27.20% 1.10%
3.4. Size of the model
According to our knowledge, there is no other paper in the relevant literature which analyzes the housing market of a whole 
country by representing all of the households as well as the housing stock in its entirety. For our purposes however, it was necessary 
to create the model in this fashion as this design contributed greatly to the accuracy and granularity of the simulation results in a 
threefold way.
(i) As discussed above, in order to obtain suﬃciently homogeneous divisions based on empirical data, we had to divide the country 
into 124 neighbourhoods. Since the price formation of the oﬀered ﬂats on the market is based on the transactions of the previous 
periods in the given area, the number of households making deals has to be high enough in each neighbourhood.
(ii) Secondly, by representing the whole market it becomes possible to analyze the eﬀects of various economic policies at more 
disaggregated levels. In this way, we can examine relatively small groups of households, such as low-income households, 
families with many children, ﬁrst-time home buyers, etc.
(iii) Additionally, there is also a third justiﬁcation for the high-resolution strategy, namely, that the model is not scale invariant. If we 
use fewer agents, the long-term averages of the main time series generated by the model change considerably. To demonstrate 
this eﬀect, we ran the sample model using only simulated data with 50,000 and 500,000 agents in a ﬁctive economy. In the 
results, we show the averages of three realizations for both parameterizations. One realization consists of 3,000 periods, out of 
which we ignored the ﬁrst 500 to exclude burn-in eﬀects.
According to the results in Table4, the long-term average house prices decreased by 28% and the number of transactions on the 
housing market dropped by almost 97% in the case of 50,000 agents in the model, compared to the scenario using 500,000 agents. 
While the ﬁrst order autocorrelation in the prices is 0.94 for the larger model, it is only 0.04 for the smaller version. We can observe 
similar pattern – although to a lesser extent – in the autocorrelation of the number of transactions.
The main driver of this level of scale dependence is the agents’ behaviour regarding the house selection mechanism. Buyers would 
place a bid with a high probability only on ﬂats with which they can obtain similar consumer surplus as that of the best ﬁctive ﬂat. If 
there are fewer agents in the economy, there will be fewer ﬂats on the market, which leads to lower probabilities for the households 
to ﬁnd a suitable home, i.e. frictions on the market become more severe. This phenomenon is well illustrated by the fact that with 
500,000 agents in the model 27% of the ﬂats for sale can actually be sold, while this number drops astonishingly to 1% for the model 
with 50,000 individuals. The diﬀerence in the autocorrelation is driven by the same mechanism: with fewer households in the model 
there is a larger variance regarding the type of ﬂats which can be sold on the market.
As is clearly shown by this example, scale dependence can lead to serious distortions in policy analyses if the number of agents 
diﬀers too much from the actual size of the system. In these situations, the eﬀect of the policy shocks can be completely dominated 
by the ampliﬁed frictions, which would render the model unserviceable.
3.5. Credit market
Housing market models usually do not include detailed credit markets, only standard housing loans typically with long maturity. 
By contrast, we propose two further loan contract types which are available for households in the model: (i) personal loans which can 
be used for renovation purposes; and (ii) bridge loans for households that want to buy a new ﬂat and sell the old one simultaneously. 
Personal loans make it possible to carry out renovations even for those who would not be able to aﬀord it without a loan,13 and 
bridge loans can greatly mitigate the frictions on the market as it is no longer necessary to sell the old ﬂat before buying the new one 
in the case of moving. Even though this problem can have a large inﬂuence on the timing of transactions, it is usually not handled 
realistically in the existing models.
The inclusion of these additional loan types also makes an important contribution to the model’s suitability for analyzing macro-
prudential regulation. Since in reality households can have multiple loans, one can represent their indebtedness, and thus also 
systemic risks more accurately, which enhances the precision when measuring the eﬀects of macroprudential policy changes. This 
line of reasoning leads to another novel feature of our model: households must comply with the actual, complex LTV and DSTI 
regulatory rules in order to take out a loan. In accordance with the Hungarian regulation, the DSTI limit can have six diﬀerent values 
13 In Hungary, the majority of loans used for renovation purposes are unsecured loans.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
14
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 5
Average diﬀerences between model variants with and without procyclical be-
haviour rules in the banking system.
Diﬀerenceinthe
#oftransactions
Diﬀerenceinthenew
housingloanvolume
Diﬀerenceinthe
defaultrate(pp)
2018 0% 0% 0.0
2019 0% 0% 0.0
2020 -5% -7% 0.0
2021 -2% -5% -0.1
2022 1% 2% -0.1
2023 1% 1% -0.1
2024 0% 0% 0.0
depending not only on the income of the given household, but also on the length of interest rate ﬁxation.14 The higher the income is 
and the longer the interest rate is guaranteed to remain unchanged, the higher the DSTI limit will be. Since the heterogeneity of the 
households in the model allows for these types of diﬀerentiation, we can analyze the regulatory tools with all the details present in 
reality.
There is another important macroprudential consideration which we incorporated in the behaviour of the credit market in the 
model. After the 2008 crisis, the procyclicality of the banking system played a central role in the formation of the new regulatory 
framework. We introduced this aspect into the model by implementing a rule which makes the bank tighten its lending standards if 
the unemployment rate increases in the economy. To examine the cycle-amplifying eﬀect of this attitude of the bank, we calculated 
the average diﬀerence between 10-10 model simulations with and without this rule (see Table5).
After the economic growth in the period 2018-2019, the COVID-19 shock caused a major decline in 2020. Regarding the period 
after 2021, we used the forecast of the Central Bank of Hungary, according to which the economy will start growing again from 
2022. As shown in Table5, the number of transactions and the volume of newly issued loans in the depression period of 2020-2021 
are considerably lower in the model simulations with stricter lending standards. Despite the correction in the following few years, we 
can clearly observe reduced lending activity during the time span of the simulation due to the procyclical behaviour of the banking 
system. Additionally, the lower amount of newly issued loans also entailed lower default rates until the end of the simulation’s time 
horizon.
Furthermore, we are able to analyze not only the volume of new loans, but also their distribution by the income deciles of the 
households. According to Fig.2, tightening of the credit supply aﬀects households with lower income levels more strongly.
3.6. Cyclical behaviour
The possibility of cycles emerging in the housing market is ensured by two mechanisms in our model: (i) credit constraints, and 
(ii) the impatience of buyers. In the case of a tight housing market, some households may have to wait longer to buy a suitable ﬂat. 
The more they have to wait, the more tolerant they become regarding the price and the characteristics of ﬂats. This behaviour exerts 
upwards pressure on the prices, but after a while this eﬀect is superseded by the increasingly binding credit constraints.
According to our knowledge, the introduction of impatienceis a novel approach to induce cyclicality on the housing market. The 
underlying intuition for this mechanism is based on the concept of the cost of waiting and the uncertainty of this cost in the future. 
If a household is not able to buy an adequate ﬂat, it has to spend on renting; moreover, it also faces the uncertainty that house 
prices may increase faster than the income of the household. Since households have only limited knowledge about the tightness of 
the housing market and the price dynamics, they cannot accurately predict the expected waiting costs. However, if they turn out to 
be unsuccessful during multiple rounds of bidding on the market, we assume in the model that they experience and anticipate higher 
waiting costs; therefore, they will be willing to buy a ﬂat even with relatively low consumer surplus. A more detailed description of 
similar behaviour patterns can be found in Mell et al. (2021).
Due to computational constraints, we can demonstrate the implications of these rules by running the sample model. In this 
environment, we also have the opportunity to compare our strategy for generating cyclical behaviour to the assumption of trend 
followerbehaviour, which is an often applied strategy in similar models (see e.g. Baptista et al. (2016)). This is built on the assumption 
that households are willing to spend more (less) on housing if the prices increase (decrease) on the market, which strengthens the 
trends in the price dynamics.
We examined the strength of the cyclical behaviour of the sample model in six cases:
1. We assumed that households have very high savings, which makes them immune to any constraints on the credit market, and 
additionally we turned oﬀ the impatience trait of the agents. These modiﬁcations should eliminate all the cyclicality from the 
simulation results.
2. We left the credit constraintsin place, but eliminated the impatienceof the agents.
3. We eliminated the credit constraints, but left the impatiencefactor in the model.
14 The DSTI regulation in Hungary is also diﬀerentiated based on the denomination of the loans; however, as there are no loans in the model denominated in foreign 
currencies, this aspect of the regulation is not relevant.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
15
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 2. Distribution of newly issued loans by households’ income deciles in the model variant with procyclical banking system. (For interpretation of the colours in 
the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 3. Results of the periodogram analysis of cyclical patterns in the time series of house prices from our model simulations with diﬀerent cycle-generating mecha-
nisms.
4. Both the credit constraintsand the impatienceare present.
5. There are no credit constraints, but we introduced the trend following, i.e. herding mechanism.
6. Combined credit constraintsand trend followingattitude.
We ran the model for 3,000 periods, out of which the ﬁrst 1,500 were ignored to exclude burn-in eﬀects. We examined the 
cyclicality in the time series data of house prices coming from the remaining 1,500 periods with periodogram analysis. Fig.3shows 
the presence of cyclical patterns in the above listed six cases. The higher the values are, the stronger the presence of cyclicality is with 
the given cycle length. One can see that there is only very low cyclicality in the time series without cyclical components or with only 
impatience eﬀect in the simulation, but in all the other cases the values are considerably higher. If there are no credit constraints, 
households are able to buy their optimal ﬂat and they do not have to wait for it, thus impatience eﬀect cannot inﬂuence them. By 
contrast, if we consider the trend follower attitude without credit constraints, idiosyncratic shocks generate long cycles with high 
amplitudes, because households could also pay very high prices for ﬂats. Enabling only the credit constraints increased the presence

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
16
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
of cycles with longer examined lengths (8-16 and 16-32 years). This ﬁnding is in line with the results in the literature focusing on 
ﬁnancial cycles, where several paper estimates the typical cycle length to be in this interval (Drehmann et al. (2012), Borio (2014), 
Aikman et al. (2015), Hiebert et al. (2018)). If we combine the credit constraintswith the impatiencemechanism, the results clearly 
indicate stronger cyclicality compared to the scenario with only impatience. This is due to the interaction between the two eﬀects: if 
credit constraints are present, households have to wait more often and for a longer time to ﬁnd an optimal ﬂat, which enhances the 
eﬀects of the impatient attitude of the buyers. By contrast, if we consider the trend follower attitude, credit constraints mitigate its 
cyclical eﬀect because households cannot aﬀord to spend so much on house purchases. Interestingly, when the credit constraints are 
present, the cyclicality is very similar regardless of whether it is paired with the impatienceor the trend follower attitude. The case 
with impatience has slightly lower values for all the three cycle lengths and both behaviour rules decrease the role of long cycles, 
while business cycles become more important.
4. Model diagnostics
4.1. Calibration results
For calibration,15 we used data regarding the ﬁrst two years in the simulations (2018 and 2019). These two years were charac-
terized by signiﬁcant economic growth, and low inﬂation and interest rates. Debt cap rules were introduced in 2015: the LTV limit 
was set at 80 per cent, while the DSTI limit was 50 or 60 per cent for HUF-denominated mortgage loans, depending on household 
income. From 2018, the Central Bank of Hungary (Magyar Nemzeti Bank, MNB) encouraged interest ﬁxation by lowering the DSTI 
limit for mortgage loans with less than 10-year interest rate ﬁxation. From 2015 on, the government introduced family beneﬁts 
supporting house purchases, which include nominal subsidies and interest rate subsidies on mortgage loans. The most privileged seg-
ment was families with at least 3 children (or planning 3 children) purchasing newly built ﬂats. The number of buy-to-let purchases 
increased, especially in districts where Airbnb demand was high. As a result, house prices, the amount of new outstanding loans and 
the volume of newly built ﬂats increased signiﬁcantly. However, due to the debt cap rules and the low base, it did not result in the 
overindebtedness of households.
The model has been calibrated to the following four empirical time series: (i) regional house prices, (ii) the quantity of newly 
issued housing loans, (iii) the number of transactions on the housing market, and (iv) the number of transactions with newly built 
ﬂats and houses. We could observe these variables between 2018Q1 and 2019Q4,16 except for the number of transactions which was 
only available until 2019Q2. We compared these data to the average results of the model calculated using ten simulation runs.,17
the results remained practically unchanged. It is important to highlight that by using the 1:1 representation of many parts of the 
economy our model starts from an initialization close to the statistical equilibrium of the considered markets. Thus, it was possible 
to reduce the burn-in period of the model to merely one or two quarters. However, because of this, our results for 2018Q1 are still 
somewhat distorted due to the remaining burn-in eﬀect.
In the case of the regional house prices in 2018Q1, we were able to calibrate the model to produce results which are less than 
10% diﬀerent compared to the empirical data for six out of the eight regions, while the largest diﬀerence was 24%. The ranking of 
the regions is also in line with the actual data; furthermore, the model was able to match the dynamics of the increasing prices in 
most of the regions (see Table 6). These results are outstandingly accurate for the two most important regions, Budapest and Pest 
county, in which more than one third of all the transactions occur. By contrast, the model’s output is somewhat further from the 
empirically observed data in the case of the Northern Great Plain and Southern Transdanubian regions, where the number of the 
transactions is also the lowest in the country.
Looking at the quantity of newly issued housing loans in 2018-19 (Table7), we can see that the model predicts a total of HUF 
1,501 billion, which is close to the actual ﬁgure of HUF 1,763 billion. The quarterly averages in the model show a diﬀerence of 
around 13% compared to the empirical ﬁgures (except for the ﬁrst quarter, which is dominated by the burn-in eﬀect).
Regarding the number of transactions on the housing market, we can observe a lack of quarterly ﬂuctuation in the predictions, 
due to the absence of seasonality in the model (Table8). The number of transactions is lower in the model for the ﬁrst three quarters 
of the examined period, but the situation is reversed afterwards. However, the distance from the actual values is less than 15% in all 
quarters, while it is only 4% if we consider the whole 1.5-year period.
The number of transactions on the market of newly built ﬂats is also very close to the data. After the ﬁrst quarter, the mean 
quarterly deviation is only 2.6%. Additionally to seasonal eﬀects, the empirical numbers were inﬂuenced by the change in the VAT 
rate and the introduction of several family support policies, the impacts of which were not modelled in the simulations.
4.2. Validation results
After the calibration, we also performed several validation steps by comparing the model’s outputs with time series which were 
not used in the calibration process. Although several new validation techniques have been developed in recent years (see Fagiolo et 
15 In the case of large scale ABMs there has not been best practice yet, though some promising calibration techniques are under development, like the Black-it toolkit 
of Banca d’Italia (Benedetti et al. (2022)).
16 Some of the empirical data were published on a quarterly basis, and thus we chose to aggregate the monthly model outputs.
17 We decided on using the average of ten runs because it proved to be an optimal choice regarding the trade-oﬀ between running time and the accuracy of the 
results. For only ﬁve runs we experienced much greater instability, whereas if we increased the number of runs above ten (up to forty).

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
17
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 6
Quarterly average house prices in 2018 and 2019 in the model and in the empirical data (in 
million HUF).
Period Budapest Pestcounty N.Hungary N.GreatPlain
Data Model Data Model Data Model Data Model
2018Q1 28.5 25.8 21.2 17.1 7.1 6.5 9.1 8.6
2018Q2 30.7 29.6 21.4 20.4 7.2 6.4 8.6 8.9
2018Q3 31.3 30.5 22.2 21.1 7.2 6.5 9.3 9.1
2018Q4 34.4 31.6 23.2 22.9 7.7 7.1 9.7 8.4
2019Q1 35.3 33.3 25.9 24.3 8.3 7.3 10.9 7.8
2019Q2 36.9 35.1 25.6 25.3 8.4 7.9 10.9 7.6
Period S.GreatPlain C.Transdanubia S.Transdanubia W.Transdanubia
Data Model Data Model Data Model Data Model
2018Q1 9.5 9.0 12.4 12.2 10.6 11.2 14.8 12.0
2018Q2 9.5 9.6 13.1 14.9 10.5 11.1 14.9 13.6
2018Q3 9.8 9.7 13.6 17.3 10.9 11.1 15.1 14.2
2018Q4 10.0 9.9 13.9 19.0 11.6 11.0 15.7 14.8
2019Q1 11.2 10.5 15.6 20.0 12.4 10.9 17.0 14.8
2019Q2 11.3 11.2 16.6 20.7 12.9 11.1 16.9 14.7
Source:MNB.
Table 7
Gross ﬂow of housing loans in 2018 
and 2019 in the model and in the 
empirical data (in HUF billion).
Period Data Model
2018Q1 172 99
2018Q2 232 202
2018Q3 243 199
2018Q4 206 194
2019Q1 203 197
2019Q2 253 201
2019Q3 222 202
2019Q4 233 208
Source:MNB.
Table 8
Number of transactions in the housing market (total and newly built) in 
2018 and 2019 in the model and in the empirical data.
Period Data
(Total)
Model
(Total)
Data
(Newlybuilt)
Model
(Newlybuilt)
2018Q1 44,015 42,562 6,496 3,366
2018Q2 49,890 44,626 6,627 6,723
2018Q3 49,023 44,775 6,432 6,173
2018Q4 41,722 45,326 6,768 5,515
2019Q1 44,396 48,325 4,245 5,319
2019Q2 45,746 49,035 4,827 4,511
Source:MNB.
al. (2019)and  Lux and Zwinkels (2018)) especially in the case of theoretical ABMs, the validation of agent-based models is still an 
open question. For example, Lamperti (2018) proposes a validation procedure based on comparing the dynamics of simulated and 
actual data. Guerini and Moneta (2017)investigated  the similarity of the estimated relationships between actual and simulated time 
series as a validation. Since in our case we were able to use 2 years of data for validation, these procedures could not be applied; 
instead we examined the goodness of ﬁt of the model outputs at a disaggregated level. As the households and their demographic 
and ﬁnancial characteristics were generated based on empirical data – from the Hungarian Central Statistical Oﬃce and the Central 
Administration of National Pension Insurance – socio-economic traits cannot be the basis of the validation. Furthermore, we could 
not use several of the variables describing the housing market, as the total number of transactions and the regional prices as these 
pieces of information had already been involved in the calibration process.
However, the regional transaction numbers are still usable as a means of validation (see Table9). Based on this, we can see that 
the model was able to capture the outstanding role of Budapest, and it matches the actual numbers in each quarter with an error 
smaller than 10%. The results are also promising for the rest of the regions, where the diﬀerence between the model’s output and 
the actual numbers is usually only a couple hundred transactions. We could detect only one minor systematic bias in the results. The

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
18
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 9
Number of transactions in 2018 and 2019 in the model and in the empirical data.
Period Budapest Pestcounty N.Hungary N.GreatPlain
Data Model Data Model Data Model Data Model
2018Q1 10,937 9,592 4,845 6,372 4,346 3,445 5,805 4,800
2018Q2 11,106 11,141 5,822 6,617 5,562 3,466 6,705 4,623
2018Q3 10,658 10,910 5,586 6,120 5,547 3,674 6,824 4,578
2018Q4 9,749 10,572 4,594 6,230 4,418 3,720 5,578 4,722
2019Q1 10,671 10,612 5,097 6,571 4,688 4,056 5,771 5,146
2019Q2 10,222 10,708 5,321 6,517 5,040 4,173 5,946 5,156
Period S.GreatPlain C.Transdanubia S.Transdanubia W.Transdanubia
Data Model Data Model Data Model Data Model
2018Q1 5,476 5,131 4,662 4,470 3,764 3,555 4,180 3,984
2018Q2 6,295 5,495 5,288 4,349 4,618 3,551 4,494 3,994
2018Q3 6,204 5,645 5,196 4,326 4,497 3,754 4,511 4,067
2018Q4 5,087 5,862 4,364 4,383 3,774 3,969 4,158 4,227
2019Q1 5,441 6,406 4,699 4,726 3,929 4,164 4,100 4,560
2019Q2 5,766 6,430 4,916 4,935 4,304 4,167 4,231 4,584
Source:MNB.
Table 10
Average neighbourhood quality of ﬂats in transac-
tions between 2018 and 2019 in the model and in 
the empirical data.
Region Data Model
Budapest 7.0 6.9
Pestcounty 3.8 3.4
NorthernHungary 1.9 1.9
NorthernGreatPlain 2.3 2.7
SouthernGreatPlain 2.2 2.4
CentralTransdanubia 2.8 2.8
SouthernTransdanubia 2.4 2.4
WesternTransdanubia 3.2 3.0
Source:MNB.
model tends to underestimate the transaction numbers for the less developed areas (Northern Hungary and Northern Great Plain), 
and overestimates them for one of the most developed region (Pest county).
Unfortunately, there is not much empirical data at our disposal about the transactions on the housing market; however, we 
were able to perform one additional comparison which concerns the average neighbourhood quality of the ﬂats involved in the 
transactions in the diﬀerent regions (see Table 10). In this regard, the model is able to match the average neighbourhood quality 
with a diﬀerence less than 0.1 in four cases out of the eight regions, while for two other regions this diﬀerence is around 0.2. The 
ranking of the regions from this aspect is also correctly reconstructed by the model with the exception of one region (Northern Great 
Plain), which has slightly lower average neighbourhood quality value in reality.
As the model produces several outputs related to the credit market, we were also able to use these results for validation. For 
instance, we can observe both in the model and in reality the ratio of transactions for which the buyers used bank ﬁnancing (see 
Table 11). Apart from the ﬁrst two quarters – during which the burn-in eﬀect could distort the result to some extent – we see 
diﬀerences of only 1-3 percentage points. Together with the calibration of newly issued loans, this suggests that the model can 
accurately capture the aggregate credit ﬂows for housing purposes, which is a very important result from a macroprudential point of 
view.
The agent-based approach makes it also possible to compare the distribution of indebted households in several characteristics to 
the empirical data. Firstly, we considered the distribution based on the income deciles of the households (see Fig.4). The model is 
in line with the empirical observation that households in the higher income deciles account for a much larger share on the credit 
market (especially the highest decile) than the lower deciles. While the diﬀerence between the model and the data is very small 
(1.4 percentage points on average), there is only one category – the 9th percentile group – for which we can see a slightly more 
considerable, 4.5-percentage  point deviation.
The model predicts similarly well the distribution of newly issued housing loans based on the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of the 
households with loan contracts (see Fig.5). We can see that the model is able to capture the fact that around 60% of the loans belong 
to the two highest LTV deciles. The highest decile has far the largest weight, while the lower a decile is, the less its weight is. This 
implies that the model is capable of accurately measuring the risks stemming from not being completely covered by collateral, and 
also the varying extent to which the LTV regulation is binding for the households.
The ﬁt of the model is less convincing in the case of the debt service-to-income (DSTI) distribution of loan contracts (see Fig.6). 
The main reason for this is that the empirical data contain the payments of all the loan types, while we only modelled housing loans

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
19
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 4. Distributionofthevolumeofnewlyissuedhousingloansin2018and2019basedontheincomedecilesofthehouseholds.(Source:MNB.)
Fig. 5. Distributionofthevolumeofnewlyissuedhousingloansin2018and2019basedontheloan-to-value(LTV)ratiooftheloans.(Source:MNB.)

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
20
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 11
Number of newly issued housing 
loans / Number of transactions in 
2018 and 2019 in the model and in 
the empirical data.
Period Data Model
2018Q1 41% 31%
2018Q2 43% 47%
2018Q3 45% 46%
2018Q4 46% 44%
2019Q1 46% 44%
2019Q2 46% 43%
Source:MNB.
Fig. 6. Distributionofthevolumeofnewlyissuedhousingloansin2018and2019basedonthedebtservice-to-income(DSTI)ratiooftheloans.(Source:MNB.)
and personal loans which can be used for renovation purposes. This leads to smaller DSTI values in the model, which also results 
in the underestimation of default probabilities. This caveat could only be corrected by modelling the consumption behaviour of the 
households in a more detailed way, but such an extension would go far beyond the scope of a housing market model.18
4.3. Sensitivity analysis
Although the reliability of calibrating a large number of parameters is a focal point in the criticisms of the ABM paradigm in 
economics, in the case of most large-scale ABMs in this literature there is no emphasis put on sensitivity analysis, although there are 
propositions on how to conduct sensitivity analyses on ABMs, as in Borgonovo et al. (2022). An elaborated exercise in this pertinent 
matter could not only enhance the credibility of the results, but also make it possible to assess the contributions of the diﬀerent 
mechanisms to the outputs of the model. However, computational constraints – especially for large, data-driven models – pose a 
signiﬁcant barrier in the present. In this section, we attempt to overcome this obstacle and provide a detailed sensitivity analysis for 
our model.
18 In an extended version of our model, we also take into consideration a special consumption loan type (prenatal baby support loans), which accounts for nearly 
half of the new outstanding consumption loans from June 2019. The distribution generated by this version of the model was much closer to the empirical distribution.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
21
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 7. Box plots of 40 realizations of four highlighted output variables of the model with respect to three parameter sets: original values, 10% perturbation, 20% 
perturbation.
4.3.1. Robustness analysis
Since our model uses 60 calibrated parameters, it was not possible to examine their robustness one by one. As an alternative 
strategy, we tested the sensitivity of the model’s output to these parameters simultaneously in a perturbation exercise. For all 
of these parameters, we modiﬁed their values using random numbers drawn ﬁrstly from the 𝑈(−10%, +10%), and then from the 
𝑈(−20%, +20%) uniform distributions. We compared the results of 40 runs generated with the original parameters to the results of 
40 realizations with each of these random perturbations. To evaluate the diﬀerences between the results of these three diﬀerent 
speciﬁcations, we compared the median and also the mean values of the variables used in the calibration and validation phases.19
Our measurement strategy consists of three techniques: (i) visualization of the distribution of the model outputs using box plots 
for the three diﬀerent cases; (ii) hypothesis testing for the equality of the median values of the output variables across the three 
speciﬁcations; and (iii) hypothesis testing using Welch’s test for the equality of the mean values of the output variables across the 
three speciﬁcations. While the median test considers the equality of the three cases simultaneously, the Welch’s test is only suitable 
for pairwise comparisons. The main advantage of Welch’s test over the t-test is that it is robust to the diﬀerent variances of the 
distributions out of which the three samples have been generated. According to our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt in the 
literature on large-scale economic ABMs to perform a sensitivity analysis in this fashion.
Fig. 7 shows the results for four of the most important output variables of the model, while the rest of the outcomes of the 
robustness analysis can be found in AppendicesC.1and C.2(Figs.C.1–C.3, C.6–C.10). The results of the robustness analysis are in 
accordance with the lessons of the calibration and validation processes, i.e. that usually the variables for which the calibration was 
less successful also proved to be less robust to perturbations and showed larger variance across realizations. A typical example for 
this situation is the average prices and the number of transactions in the least developed regions of Hungary. Nevertheless, according 
to the box plots there are only very few such problematic variables. In the case of the realizations generated with the original 
parameters, the diﬀerence between the minimum and the maximum values of the box plots are less than 10% for most of the cases, 
19 For hypothesis testing at least 30 runs were necessary, while the runtime of the model constrained us in using many more runs. Therefore, we chose to test the 
average and the median of 40 realizations.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
22
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
and almost never exceeds 20%. For the perturbed scenarios, this diﬀerence is higher, but it increases only by a smaller factor than 
the maximum level of the perturbation.
In the case of the hypothesis tests, we found that the ﬁrst two quarters (2018Q1-Q2) are – similarly to the calibration – strongly 
inﬂuenced by the burn-in eﬀect. In these periods, we can almost always reject the hypothesis that the means and also the medians are 
identical across the three parameter scenarios. Similarly, in the last two quarters of the time horizon (2019Q3-Q4) the modiﬁcations 
to the parameters cause larger and larger deviations across the model outcomes in the three cases. However, in the remaining part of 
the time horizon (and especially in the case of the variables describing the loan distributions based on LTV, DSTI and income deciles) 
the results indicate at all of the usual signiﬁcance levels that the three cases produce identical outcomes. The highest match between 
the three cases happens in the period between 2018Q4 and 2019Q1: in the case of 20 of the 29 variables in this exercise we found 
that the means (and usually also the medians) are statistically identical between the runs with the original parameter set and the 
runs with 10% perturbation of the parameter values. In the case of 20% perturbation, we obtained basically the same results for the 
2018Q4 period. We can observe overall that the increase in the perturbation from 10% to 20% did not lead to larger divergence in 
the means of the examined outcome variables, and the robustness of the most important model outputs proved to be relatively high 
in the case of the simultaneous perturbation of the model parameters.
4.3.2. Parameter importance assessment
As the next phase of the sensitivity analysis, we investigated the individual importance of the parameters on the model outputs. 
Our strategy for this consisted of two steps: (i) In order to reduce the complexity of the task, we ﬁltered and grouped together the 
parameters into 4 blocks. (ii) In the second step we conducted a variance-decomposition analysis based on the Sobol method for the 
four groups of parameters obtained in step (i).
For the ﬁrst step we could utilize the data generated by the robustness checks of the previous section to carry out a regression 
analysis. The two sets of 40 runs with perturbed parameters provided us with a set of dependent variables (the 29 output variables 
of the simulations) and a set of explanatory variables (the values of the 60 parameters).20 To determine the importance of the 
parameters, we counted the number of regressions in which a given parameter had signiﬁcant coeﬃcient, and we narrowed down the 
list of parameters to 12 based on this ranking. (The signiﬁcance level did not materially inﬂuence the results of this step. AppendixC.2
contains the results for a 5% signiﬁcance level.) The ﬁrst parameter on this narrowed list was signiﬁcant in 21 regressions, while 
the last one was signiﬁcant in 8. There were 34 parameters in the original list which had a signiﬁcant coeﬃcient in less than ﬁve 
regressions. These 12 parameters could be divided into four categories: parameters governing (i) the minimum consumption level of 
households, (ii) the mandatory moving behaviour of households, (iii) foreclosure in the case of defaulting loans, and (iv) households’ 
purchasing for investment purposes. For the detailed parameter description see AppendixC.2(Figs.C.4, C.5).
In the second step, we conducted a Sobol-type variance decomposition in which we could separately measure the ﬁrst-order 
eﬀects (FOE) and the total-order eﬀects (TOE), which takes into account indirect channels and interactions as well. For both of these 
calculations we used the estimator method introduced by Jansen (1999). Similarly to the robustness analysis, we ran our model with 
maximum 20% perturbed parameter values, however, in this case we modiﬁed the parameters belonging to the same group in a 
synchronized way to keep them consistent with each other. Furthermore, we did not modify the parameters which were ﬁltered out 
in step (i).
The required number of simulations for this decomposition technique depends of course on the model and also on the number of 
parameters, but it is considered to be suﬃcient if the results converge. To increase the accuracy of the results, one has to double the 
number of runs each time. Given our computational capacities the maximum number of simulations to complete the FOE and TOE 
calculations was 1,530, which resulted in suﬃciently reliable outcomes for most cases.21
According to our results (Fig.8), the parameters inﬂuencing the minimum consumption level of households have both the largest 
ﬁrst-order and total eﬀects for most of the model’s output variables. Their role is especially strong for the distribution of new lending 
across income deciles. The underlying reason behind this is the mechanism that if households in low-income deciles consume less, 
they will be able to accumulate the down payment for buying a ﬂat more easily, and they can also tolerate higher instalments after 
their loans. Similarly, the same reasons may be responsible for the high impact on the transaction numbers in almost all regions in 
the country. These parameters even have a relatively large eﬀect on the distribution of new loans in terms of DSTI categories.
The parameters determining the moving behaviour of households mostly aﬀect (at the ﬁrst-order) the ratio of purchasing ﬂats 
using loan and the distribution of new loans by LTV category. A typical situation explaining this phenomenon can be the following. 
If households decide to move earlier, then they will be more likely to be in need for a (larger) bank loan, which would lead to higher 
LTV values. Regarding the total eﬀect, we can observe the strongest impact of these parameters in the case of Northern Great Plain 
and Northern Hungary, and mostly on the average house prices and the number of transactions in these regions. Additionally, the 
total eﬀect on the number of transactions of newly built ﬂats is also relatively strong for this category.
The parameters inﬂuencing foreclosure in the case of defaulting loans have the strongest ﬁrst-order eﬀect on the house prices 
and on the number of transactions in Budapest. Furthermore, the total eﬀect is quite high in the case of the number of transactions 
of newly built ﬂats, and on the average house prices and the number of transactions in the Northern and the Southern Great Plain 
20 In the cases where we observed more than one time periods, we ran panel regressions. In these regressions we also included the one period lagged value of the 
dependent variable on the right-hand side. For the nine variables representing the LTV, DSTI and income categories we used pooled regressions.
21 The variables for which the reliability of the results seems to be unsatisfactory are the following: house prices and number of transactions in the region of Northern 
Hungary, house prices in the region of Southern Transdanubia, and the credit market variables for the lowest and highest LTV categories.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
23
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 8. Scatterplotsoftheﬁrst-orderandtotaleﬀectsofthefourhighlightedparametergroups.
regions. The reason why these variables are aﬀected the most strongly by this parameter group is that in the case of foreclosure 
events ﬂats are sold faster and with a higher discount, which leads to larger supply of ﬂats and lower prices on the market.
The ﬁrst-order impacts of the parameters governing households’ purchasing behaviour for investment purposes is very high on 
the house price variables in almost every region, but they are also important in the case of the loan distribution by DSTI and LTV 
categories. The total eﬀect is outstandingly high here on the number of transactions of newly built ﬂats. As these parameters largely 
determine investment demand, their strong inﬂuence on the prices and on lending is intuitively understandable.
Finally, it is important to highlight the diﬀerences between the ﬁrst-order and total eﬀects. Where they deviate from each other 
to a great extent, it implies a strong role of interactions. This is the case in particular for the number of transactions of newly built 
ﬂats, and also for the average house prices and for the number of transactions in certain regions. On the other hand, this diﬀerence 
is relatively small in the case of the loan distributions by DSTI and LTV categories, and it is insigniﬁcant for the amount of newly 
issued loans and the ratio of ﬂat purchases with loans.
5. Applications
In this section we present two applied analyses with our model, which we carry out at a disaggregation level that is only possible 
owing to the novel features of the proposed modellingstrategy.  We match these simulations to a speciﬁc point in time (starting from 
2018) and quantify the impacts of the shocks over a time horizon of seven years, by averaging the outputs of 10 simulation runs.
5.1. Eﬀects of increased construction costs on the housing market
The detailed description of the construction sector in our model makes it possible to analyze the eﬀects of the increased construc-
tion costs on the housing market at a level of detail which is unique in the literature according to our knowledge.
To carry out this analysis, we ran the model with two diﬀerent scenarios. In the baseline case, the changes in construction costs 
every month correspond to the changes in nominal GDP (see Equation (A.4)). By contrast, in the second scenario, construction costs 
dynamics diﬀer from the nominal GDP growth, as they are set at a persistently higher level according to actual data and expert 
projections (Fig.9). The paths of construction costs in the two scenarios do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly in the ﬁrst two years, however,

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
24
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 9. Increaseinconstructioncostsbetween2018and2024inthetwoscenariosofthemodel.(Source:MNBandHCSO.)
Fig. 10. Constructioncostsandhousepricesbyregion(Source:MNBandHCSO.)
from 2020 on, actual data and expert projections yield approximately two times higher growth of construction costs than based 
on the growth rate of nominal GDP. Furthermore, the increase in the cost of renovation was assumed to match construction cost 
dynamics in both scenarios (see Equation (A.8)). All of the other assumptions of the model, as well as the exogenous macroeconomic 
variables, were identical for the two scenarios, i.e. we disregarded the eﬀects of construction costs on inﬂation and monetary policy.
The initial level of construction costs was set to match the oﬃcial regional data of the Hungarian Central Statistical Oﬃce in 
January 2018. Although there are regional diﬀerences in construction costs,22 these are much smaller than the diﬀerences in house 
prices (Fig.10). While the largest diﬀerence between two regions is less than 20% considering costs, it is more than 70% in the case 
of prices. If we focus only on newly built ﬂats, this price range is smaller, at only 45%. This diﬀerence can be explained by the fact 
that the price of newly built ﬂats is determined by three components: (i) the cost of the building site, (ii) the cost of the construction, 
and (iii) the mark-up; and although the ratio of these varies not only in time but also across regions, their composition is more stable 
across regions than the average house price. Based on these heterogeneities, one can anticipate that the impact of a construction cost 
shock will also be diﬀerent across regions.
22 The construction cost dynamics depicted in Fig.9 are applied to all regions uniformly. In the case of the higher cost scenario, this increase is 65% until 2022. 
According to the actual data at the regional level, the minimal and maximal construction cost increase were 52% and 72% respectively. If one excludes these two 
values, the regional dynamics of construction costs were between 62% and 66%. Therefore, this simpliﬁcation had only a moderate eﬀect on our results.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
25
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 11. Somekeyvariablesofthenewlybuiltmarket–deviationfromthebaselinescenarioinpercent.
A construction cost shock directly aﬀects the construction sector and thus the market of newly built ﬂats. Depending on the 
price elasticity of demand, the construction sector can react to the cost shock in the model in two ways: (i) either by increasing 
the prices of the newly built ﬂats, (ii) or by lowering its proﬁt margin. Ac-cording to our modelling assumptions, the construction 
sector opts for strategy (i) at ﬁrst, but if this results in a high number of unsold ﬂats, it will eventually decrease the mark-up (see 
Equations (A.2), (A.5), (A.6)). Fig.11shows higher price/square meter and reduced mark-up for newly built ﬂats compared to the 
baseline scenario in all regions.23 The number of transactions of newly built ﬂats contracted by 20% after a 5% increase in prices, 
which suggests strong price sensitivity of demand. If we consider the diﬀerences across regions, we can see considerable variation 
regarding the number of new constructions: while in Budapest it decreased to the same extent as demand (measured by the number 
of transactions of newly built ﬂats), in the other regions the setback was 1.5-2 times larger. This diﬀerence is intuitive since the 
weight of construction costs among the determinants of the prices is higher in the less developed neighbourhoods (see Fig.10), and 
consequently, the construction company would have to increase prices more (in relative terms) than in Budapest. However, as these 
poorer neighbourhoods have low purchasing power, there will be no suﬃcient demand left, and so the number of constructions will 
decrease.
Regarding the number of transactions, we can observe a slight reduction in Budapest and a small increase in the other regions 
(Fig.12). To explain these results better, it is worth focusing on the ﬁner details. The distribution of ﬂats in the transactions shifts 
towards used ﬂats with lower quality, located in neighbourhoods with lower average salaries. The quality of the housing stock 
deteriorates in general as well due to the increased cost of renovation, which leads to a 14-17% drop in the volume of renovations in 
every region. The small diﬀerences can be explained by the share of newly built transactions (in addition to the income situation of 
households). If households can buy more newly built ﬂats, they will spend less on renovation. Since the share of newly built ﬂats still 
remains signiﬁcantly higher in Budapest, it explains why the decrease in renovation quantity is slightly greater there than in other 
regions. As the impact of the cost shock is not fully incorporated in the prices of used ﬂats due to the price-sensitive demand, the 
number of transactions increases in the poorer regions because households can be better oﬀ buying used ﬂats with higher quality, 
instead of renovating their original ﬂats.
Looking at the price indices in the three geographic categories, we can see substantial diﬀerences. The price increase in the 
low-income regions is 2-3 times higher compared to the more developed areas, but this variation disappears almost completely if we 
only focus on newly built ﬂats. There are two factors that explain this observation. Due to the cost shocks and the increase in the 
prices of new ﬂats, part of the demand is diverted to the market of used ﬂats. Additionally, the reduced construction activity hinders 
the expansion of the housing stock and leads to lower supply even over the long run. The number of new constructions shrank to the 
greatest extent in the low-income regions, and consequently the price increase was also the largest here.
We were also able to identify the extent to which the diﬀerent segments of households are aﬀected by the construction cost 
increase (Fig. 13). We found that ﬁrst-time buyers (FTBs) – who are generally in the worst position on the market – are more 
vulnerable to this shock scenario than the rest of the households. The number of transactions connected to FTBs dropped more in 
all regions than the aggregate transaction number. This means that due to the construction cost increase these households can only 
23 For the sake of clearer presentation of the results, we grouped the regions of Hungary into three categories based on their development level (Budapest; Middle-
income regions: Pest county, Central Transdanubia, Western Transdanubia; and Low-income regions: the rest of the regions). Within each of these groups, the impact 
of the cost shock is almost the same.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
26
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Note:Renovation quantity was measured in one unit of state quality improvement by square meter.
Fig. 12. Somekeyvariablesofthetotalhousingmarket–deviationfromthebaselinescenarioinpercent.
Fig. 13. Numberofﬁrst-timebuyersandinterregionalrelocations–deviationfromthebaselinescenarioinpercent.
buy their ﬁrst own home years later (or not at all). The decrease in the number of FTBs is similar in Budapest and in the low-income 
regions, because even though the price level of ﬂats was 3-4 times higher, the increase in prices was 3 times lower in Budapest than 
in low-income regions.
We also assessed the number of relocations from one region to another, which shows an overall decrease of 4% as a result of 
the shock. While there was a 1% increase in the number of households moving from Budapest to the more aﬀordable agglomeration 
area, we can also see a 5% decrease in the number of households moving to Budapest from the middle-income regions. These results 
indicate that mobility in the society may also be aﬀected by the increased construction costs.
5.2. Eﬀects of increased family support measures and the role of the construction sector’s capacity constraints
In 2016, the Hungarian government launched a new policy called the Family Housing Support Programme (FHSP) to subsidize 
purchases of newly built homes for families which comply with the eligibility criteria. As this had profound consequences for the 
residential housing market, we also took this into account in our model. Since the most important condition for eligibility is to have 
(or in the next few years plan to have) children in the families, it was important to model the demographic processes as accurately

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
27
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table 12
Number of subsidized families with 
FHSP in 2018 and 2019 in the model and 
in the empirical data.
Period Data Model
2018Q1 1845 1822
2018Q2 2249 3488
2018Q3 2351 2740
2018Q4 1924 2477
2019Q1 2165 2273
2019Q2 2481 1947
2019Q3 2180 2093
2019Q4 2587 1981
Source:MNB.
Note:In most cases, couples applied for HUF 2.6 million. Source: MNB and HCSO.
Fig. 14. TheroleofFHSPsubsidybyregion.
as possible. The amount of the subsidy is also dependent on the number of children: it is HUF 600,000 (EUR 1,609) for one child; 
HUF 2,600,000 (EUR 6,971) for two children; and HUF 10,000,000 (EUR 26,811) for three or more children.24 The programme has 
no announced end date, but each household can only be subsidized once. In our model, households take into consideration the FHSP 
subsidy when they choose the best ﬁctive ﬂat and bid for newly built ﬂats: they adjust the price and the consumer surplus of these 
ﬂats with the available FHSP subsidy.
To complete the validation of the model, we compared the number of families receiving FHSP subsidies in the simulations with 
the real data. Table12shows that both time series take values between 2000 and 2500 per quarter, with an overall deviation of 2% 
in the observed years. Diﬀerences in the quarterly data are caused by the burn-in period in the ﬁrst half of 2018, by seasonality, and 
by speciﬁc shocks regarding the construction sector. It is also important to highlight that there is substantial regional heterogeneity 
regarding the importance of this programme. The amount of the typical subsidy compared to the average newly built ﬂat prices in 
the diﬀerent regions can vary between 5-9% (Fig.14). Furthermore, purchases for investment purpose – which are concentrated in 
Budapest and in the larger towns – are not eligible for the subsidy. Consequently, the ratio of subsidized purchases of newly built 
ﬂats is only 32% in Budapest, while this number is between 45-66% in the other regions of the country. These heterogeneities imply 
that the demand for newly built ﬂats is inﬂuenced by the FHSP subsidies signiﬁcantly more strongly in the regions in the countryside 
compared to the major urban areas.
In this application, we analyze the implications of doubling the amounts of the FHSP subsidy on the housing market. To be able 
to investigate this aspect, we added a scenario which combines the increased (actual and projected) construction cost path and the 
doubled amount of the available subsidy for families.
24 The conversion was calculated using the exchange rate between HUF and EUR on 28 April 2023.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
28
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 15. Constructionsectormark-upsandnewlybuiltsquaremeterprices–deviationfromthebaselinescenarioinpercentagepoints.
As an additional dimension in this analysis, we also attempt to decompose the diﬀerent mechanisms behind the impact of the 
FHSP subsidy, most importantly by highlighting the role of capacity constraints in the construction sector. As discussed in Section3.3, 
the construction sector has the potential to compensate imbalances on the housing market by building new ﬂats to oﬀset the eﬀects 
of increased demand. However, this mechanism is constrained by the construction time and the capacities of the sector. Of course, 
these constraints were present to some extent in all of the previous scenarios as well: the number of square meters under construction 
could exceed the initial value of this measure (January 2018) by 100% at most, and the construction sector was allowed to start 
new building projects corresponding to no more than 1/18 of the overall capacities in each month (as the construction time is 18 
month in the model). Since the scenario which combines the higher construction costs with the doubled FHSP subsidies results in a 
substantial strengthening of the demand side of the housing market (see the detailed results below), the construction sector’s reaction 
can potentially be a highly inﬂuential factor in the outcome of the model. To examine this, we considered an alternative version of 
this simulation, in which the construction sector is not able to expand its capacities at all. More speciﬁcally, the construction sector’s 
capacity for newly built ﬂats (expressed in square meters) was capped at the level which we observed in the scenario of the cost shock 
without the doubled FHSP subsidies. In this way, we were able to decompose the eﬀect of the increased demand and the role of the 
construction capacity constraints which determine the adjustment opportunities on the supply side. In the presentation of the results, 
we distinguish between the two versions of the model: “limited” refers to the baseline variant, in which the construction sector 
has some expansion possibilities; and “ﬁxed” refers to the newly introduced setup without any room for supply-side adjustment. 
The results in this section will be presented in relative terms to the outcomes of the construction cost shock scenario (expressed in 
percentages or percentage points).
In the ﬁrst two years of the baseline scenario (high construction costs, actual FHSP subsidy amount), there was a large increase 
in the output of the construction sector in all regions. In some regions the capacity constraint was even binding. In 2020, the output 
of the construction sector started to decrease signiﬁcantly and then stagnated at low levels. Therefore, in the ﬁrst two years, the 
maximum capacity was similar for the “ﬁxed” and the “limited” scenarios, however, by the end of 2024 the maximum capacity and 
the output of the construction sector in the “ﬁxed” scenario was 67% in Budapest, 25% in middle-income regions and only 10% in 
low-income regions of the “limited” output.
In the case of the doubled FHSP subsidies, the average price per square meter increases in all regions with both model variants, 
but the extent of this is greater with “ﬁxed” capacities (although we did not ﬁlter out the eﬀect of the change in the composition 
of ﬂats based on neighbourhoods) (Fig.15). There are two explanations for this higher growth rate. (i) First, if it is not possible to 
expand the supply, the construction sector will apply higher mark-ups as a response to the elevated demand. (ii) Second, if in turn it 
is possible to increase capacities, it will become proﬁtable to start constructions in neighbourhoods with lower average income and 
lower prices as well, which will lead to a further decrease in the prices in these regions. While the mark-ups become higher in both 
the “limited” and the “ﬁxed” versions, the diﬀerence between them is larger in the case of more developed regions. This suggests 
that the diﬀerence between these two cases is explained mainly by the mark-up-based mechanism in the more developed regions, 
while in the poorer areas the main driver is the increased number of proﬁtable construction projects in the cheaper neighbourhoods. 
This explanation is also supported by the change in the number of transactions of newly built ﬂats and in the number of newly

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
29
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. 16. Numberofnewlystartedconstructionsandnewlybuilttransactions–deviationfromthebaselinescenarioinpercent.
started constructions (Fig.16).25 The number of newly started constructions increases by only 10% in Budapest, while this number 
is between 80-100% in all the other regions. Furthermore, while the capacity constraints are not binding in Budapest, we can see 
a 40-percentage point diﬀerence between the “limited” and the “ﬁxed” cases in the other regions of the country. However, it is 
true for both cases that there is a surprisingly large increase in the number of newly started constructions in the low-income and 
middle-income regions, which implies an overshooting reaction of the construction sector. This phenomenon was also present in the 
case of the construction cost shock scenario, and it is attributable again to the fact that it becomes proﬁtable to build new ﬂats even 
in less developed regions.
Turning to the overall number of transactions in the diﬀerent regions, we can see a slight increase (of 2-4%), mainly driven by 
the more developed areas (Fig.17). The diﬀerences between the regions are also inﬂuenced by relocations between the regions (see 
below). We can also see that the change in renovations is negligible with “ﬁxed” capacities, but there is only a small decrease even in 
the “limited” case. However, the overall quality of the housing stock still improves in the latter case due to the high number of newly 
built ﬂats. Regarding the price indices, the increase in the price of newly built ﬂats in the “ﬁxed” version has a spillover eﬀect on 
the segment of used ﬂats as well, especially in the case of the low-income regions. However, if there is room for capacity expansion, 
the housing stock can grow, which leads to a decrease in prices. In summary, capacity constraints in the construction sector are 
fundamental determinants of the impact of a demand shock not only on the prices of new ﬂats, but also on the market segment of 
used ﬂats, and this inﬂuence is even larger in the case of less developed regions.
Capacity constraints are relevant even if one focuses on societal aspects (Fig. 18). While the number of FTBs grows in every 
region in the “limited” scenario, with “ﬁxed” capacities we experience a decrease in this regard in the less developed parts of 
the country. This result highlights an important consequence of targeted housing support policies, namely, that there can also be 
vulnerable households outside of the target group, whose situation might become even worse if they are not taken into consideration 
in the policy design process. We can also analyze the patterns in interregional migration in the case of the diﬀerent scenarios. If 
we assume “ﬁxed” capacities, demand will be directed towards Budapest, since that region has the most existing capacities for new 
constructions. (Although we can see high percentage values for the low-income regions, it actually means less relocations compared 
to the middle-income category because the extent of the migration in the poorer areas is only around 1/5 of that in the other regions.) 
In the “limited” case, however, there are suﬃcient numbers of new constructions outside of Budapest as well, which is conducive to 
moving in the agglomeration or within the less developed regions.
This analysis would not have been possible without the detailed modellingof  the construction sector and some of the demographic 
processes. Furthermore, the regional decomposition, the characterization of ﬂats’ location and quality and the embedding of such 
into households’ decision-making process also generated numerous valuable insights into the heterogeneities in the impact of the 
examined shocks and policies. There are several outcomes of this analysis which have important policy implications. (i) A sudden 
and signiﬁcant increase in construction costs can seriously hinder the quality improvement of the housing stock (especially in 
the low-income regions), which can even impede the fulﬁlment of certain climate objectives. (ii) It has detrimental eﬀects on the 
vulnerable household categories (e.g. FTBs) as well, and there are indications that it even lowers the mobility of households. (iii) 
25 The “ﬁxed” capacity has been deﬁned based on the number of newly built square meters, not the number of ﬂats. Hence, a shift in the size of the newly built ﬂats 
can lead to some distortion in these results.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
30
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Note:Renovation quantity was measured in one unit of state quality improvement by square meter.
Fig. 17. Somekeyvariablesofthetotalhousingmarket–deviationfromthebaselinescenarioinpercent.
Fig. 18. Numberofﬁrst-timebuyersandinterregionalrelocations–deviationfromthebaselinescenarioinpercent.
The eﬀectiveness of policies supporting the purchase of newly built ﬂats depends greatly on the ability of the construction sector to 
expand the housing stock to meet the increased demand.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced a complex, modular, 1:1 scale model of the Hungarian residential housing market, which is based 
on several empirical, micro-level datasets. This modelling framework enables policymakers to analyze detailed economic scenarios 
with macroprudential, ﬁscal and monetary policies in a way which surpasses the analytic capabilities oﬀered by traditional tools – 
especially regarding the granularity and the precision of the results. This became possible by simultaneously tackling several of the 
fundamental challenges present in the literature, such as cyclical behaviour, interlacements with the ﬁnancial sector, geographic frag-
mentation and the large extent of heterogeneities among the agents on this market. The most important features and improvements 
compared to the existing practices in these regards are the following.
To make it possible to analyze the eﬀects of various economic policies at disaggregated levels (e.g. in terms of geographic 
regions, income deciles of households, etc.), we divided the country into 124 relatively homogeneous neighbourhoods. To ensure the

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
31
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
reliability of the model, we had to have a suﬃcient amount of data at this level of granularity, which was only possible by simulating 
the housing market with all of the households and the housing stock in its entirety. To justify this modelling strategy, we showed 
that the model is not scale-invariant, i.e. the long-term averages of the generated main time series change considerably depending 
on the number of agents. The main driver of this scale dependence is that buyers would place a bid with a high probability only on 
ﬂats with which they can obtain a consumer surplus close to that of their ideal dwelling. Fewer agents in the economy would lead to 
lower transaction numbers, in which case the eﬀects of policy shocks can be masked by the ampliﬁed frictions.
The second signiﬁcant contribution considers the characteristics of ﬂats. Most of the papers consider only a single “quality” mea-
sure to quantify the desirability of ﬂats. However, our choice of characterizing ﬂats by three attributes (size, stateand location) has 
several beneﬁts: (i) while the sizeis constant over time (as it does not change even due to renovation), the stateneeds to be time-
variant to make it possible to model decisions about renovations. (ii) According to the results of our hedonic price regressions, all 
of these attributes are highly signiﬁcant, and they increase the goodness-of-ﬁt considerably. (iii) The regression results also suggest 
the outstanding importance of our neighbourhood quality variable (especially compared to more coarse-grained administrative loca-
tion variables), which contains all relevant information (public transportation, health and education institutions, residents’ income 
situation, etc.) on the location of the ﬂats.
To also account for changes in the housing stock, it is pivotal to represent the construction sector in a detailed way, a criterion 
which is not met suﬃciently in the existing housing market literature. In this paper, we emphasized the importance of this modelling 
block using a threefold argument. Firstly, the build-up of bubbles on the housing market can be substantially inﬂuenced by the 
construction sector given its potential to oﬀset the eﬀect of excessive demand, but also by its sensitivity to increased labour and 
material cost shocks. Secondly, we showed that the construction sector has important role on the housing market also in the case of 
long-term demographic phenomena which can have heterogeneous implications across regions resulting in diﬀerent dynamics on the 
local housing markets. Lastly, the construction sector often has central role in the outcome of various policies on the housing market. 
To capture the implications in a plausible way, a detailed representation of the construction sector was unavoidable in the model.
To further increase the reliability of the model, we attempted to represent household’s decision-making process in an innovative 
way. When choosing a ﬂat, households consider the consumer surplus according to standard utility maximization theory. Since 
traditional functional forms in consumer theory are used in a diﬀerent spirit, we did not constrain ourselves to a CES-design; instead, 
we investigated alternative forms and eventually opted for an exponential function with multiplicative size and state variables. In 
order to take into account the heterogeneity of agents’ preferences, each household in the model was assigned a reservation price 
function, which was calibrated uniquely using a stochastic optimization procedure.
Regarding the ﬁnancial connections of the housing market, models usually only include standard housing loans, typically with 
long maturity. By contrast, we propose two further loan contract types which are available for the households in the model: (i) 
personal loans which can be used for renovation purposes, and (ii) bridge loans for households wanting to buy a new ﬂat and sell 
the old one simultaneously. The inclusion of these additional loan types makes an important contribution to the model’s suitability 
to analyze several aspects of macroprudential regulation. Firstly, households must comply with the real-life LTV and DSTI rules in 
order to take out a loan, which enhances the plausibility of the model’s assumptions. Secondly, with this detailed representation of 
the banking block of the model we were able to examine not only the volume of new loans, but also their distribution in terms the 
income deciles of the households. This analysis showed that tightening of the credit supply aﬀects households with lower income 
levels more strongly.
In our model, we also ensured the possibility of cycles emerging in the housing market by two mechanisms: (i) credit constraints, 
and (ii) the impatience of buyers. In the case of a tight housing market, some households may have to wait longer to buy a suitable 
ﬂat. The more they have to wait, the more tolerant they become regarding the price and characteristics of ﬂats. This behaviour exerts 
upwards pressure on prices, but after a while this eﬀect is superseded by the increasingly eﬀective credit constraints. We compared 
and combined our strategy for generating cyclical behaviour with another mechanism, which is often applied in similar models. It is 
built on the assumption that households are willing to spend more (less) on housing if the prices increase (decrease) on the market, 
which strengthens the trends in the price dynamics.
We also demonstrated the features of our proposed housing market model in two applications which involve material cost shocks 
in the construction sector and family support measures (with capacity constraints in the construction sector).
We found the following in the case of the cost shock: (i) This scenario has highly heterogeneous eﬀects at the regional level. 
Higher prices caused by the shock considerably decrease the demand for newly built ﬂats, and this situation is further aggravated 
outside of the capital due to the lower proﬁt margin, which triggers supply-side adjustment as well. (ii) The lack of transactions of 
newly built ﬂats is mostly compensated by the increased number of purchases of used ﬂats, while the housing stock deteriorates 
due to the reduced number of constructions and renovations. (iii) The tighter supply (due to the lower construction activity), the 
increase in the construction costs and the diverted demand to the segment of used ﬂats increases the price of the used ﬂats as well 
(especially in the less developed regions). (iv) Higher house prices lead to lower aﬀordability and worse opportunities to move to 
more developed regions for young buyers.
Regarding the housing support for families (FHSP), our main ﬁndings are the following: (i) The more binding the capacity 
constraints of the construction sector are, the larger the price increase of newly built ﬂats is after the introduction of the FHSP 
(especially in Budapest). (ii) The FHSP policy increases the number of newly built ﬂats to a greater extent in lower-income regions, 
because it generates construction projects in neighbourhoods where they would not have been proﬁtable before. (iii) We showed that 
capacity constraints play a decisive role (especially in less developed regions) in the direction of price changes. If the construction 
sector can increase the supply to oﬀset the demand shock, prices will be lower, but the opposite happens if we assume ﬁxed capacities.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
32
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
(iv) In the case of insuﬃcient capacities, the demand shock leads to fewer transaction numbers for ﬁrst-time buyers, which highlights 
the importance of considering the opportunities of the construction sector during the policy design process.
The model has been used for several further applications at the Central Bank of Hungary, e.g. assessing the eﬀects of monetary 
policy shocks, simulating diﬀerent ﬁscal subsidies, analyzing macroprudential policy changes, etc. However, there are still ambitious 
plans for further development, most importantly to embed this agent-based housing market model into a macroeconomic environment 
to be able to generate endogenous cycles and feedback mechanisms with the rest of the economy. While this step undoubtedly 
represents a great challenge, the experiences regarding the versatile applicability of this model suggest that it is worth further 
extending the frontiers of computational economics.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dirk Kohlweyer, Marco Pangallo, Doyne Farmer, Balázs Világi, Sándor Winkler, Bálint Dancsik, Alexandr 
Maxim Palicz, János Szakács, Ádám Banai, Tamás Nagy, Gergely Fábián, the two anonymous referees and participants at the 2019 
and 2022 WEHIA conferences and ABM4policy seminars for their useful comments.
Appendix A. Details of the model
A.1. Exogenous macroeconomic environment
The macroeconomic environment is exogenous and can be described by the following time series:
• 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡 =𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑏
𝑡 ×𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑠ℎ
𝑡 . 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑏
𝑡 is the base real GDP index and 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑠ℎ
𝑡 is a time-dependent parameter altering the GDP according 
to the shock scenario (in normal times it is set to 1). In normal times, individuals form expectations for the GDP using 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑏
𝑡 , 
but in the event of a shock even for the expectations they consider 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑏
𝑡 ×𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑠ℎ
𝑡 .
• 𝑃𝑡 -price  index
• 𝐼𝑅𝑏
𝑡 -base  interest rate
• 𝑟𝑇𝐴𝑋
𝑡 -income  tax rate
•T h e probability of becoming unemployed (𝑈𝑡,𝑐) is diﬀerentiated based on three possible educational levels of individuals (𝑐). 
The length of unemployment is deﬁned with two variables (which are also diﬀerentiated according to the same educational 
categories): in each category individuals stay unemployed for at least 𝑝𝑢𝑚
𝑐 periods, after which they are hired with the probability 
of 𝑈𝑓
𝑡,𝑐.
A.2. Flats
A.2.1. Pricing of ﬂats
In this section, we only discuss ﬂat prices without going into details on the other characteristics of ﬂats. Details on other charac-
teristics can be found in AppendixB.1.
We distinguish between the market price(𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓), ask price(𝑃𝑅𝑎
𝑡,𝑓), transaction price(𝑃𝑅𝑡
𝑡,𝑓) and – in the case of newly built ﬂats 
– the cost-based price(𝑃𝑅𝑐
𝑡,𝑓) of a ﬂat 𝑓 in period 𝑡.
In the case of used ﬂats, the market priceof ﬂat 𝑓 is a preliminary estimation of the equilibrium price based on previous transac-
tions. This will also be the ﬁrst ask price of a ﬂat after it is taken to the market. It is calculated from the transactions of the previous 
period provided that there were at least two transactions (𝑗 ∈𝑇𝑅𝑡−1, where 𝑇𝑅𝑡−1 is the set of transaction records of period 𝑡 −1) 
in the same neighbourhood in the previous period, for which the absolute size deviation ratio (𝑠𝑑𝑟𝑡,𝑓,𝑗 = |𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑗 −𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓 |∕𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓) and 
the absolute state deviation ratio (𝑞𝑑𝑟𝑡,𝑓,𝑗 = |𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑗 −𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑓 |∕𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑓) do not exceed the parameters 𝑡ℎ𝑐𝑛𝑠 and 𝑡ℎ𝑐𝑛𝑞, respectively. To 
obtain the two closest records, we use the following distance measure: 𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇𝑡,𝑓,𝑗 =𝑤𝑑𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑟𝑡,𝑓,𝑗 +𝑤𝑑𝑞𝑞𝑑𝑟𝑡,𝑓,𝑗, where 𝑤𝑑𝑠 and 𝑤𝑑𝑞 are 
exogenous parameters. If we cannot take the two closest neighbours in a given period, we adjust the previous general market price by 
the increase in the nominal GDP (𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡−1,𝑖 ×𝑃𝑡𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡∕(𝑃𝑡−1𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡−1)). We calculate the market price of each ﬂat in each period, 
but it does not necessarily equal the ask price. For a used ﬂat 𝑓, 𝑃𝑅𝑎
𝑡,𝑓 =𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 ×(1  −𝑐𝑚𝑝𝑑)𝑝𝑜𝑛
𝑓 , where 𝑝𝑜𝑛
𝑓 is the number of periods in 
the market, and 𝑐𝑚𝑝𝑑 is the monthly price decrease.
Regarding the demand side, agents place bids on ﬂats. If, at the time of purchase, there is only one valid bid, the transaction price 
equals the ask price; otherwise, it equals the second highest bid price,26 i.e. we follow the logic of Vickrey auctions.
In the case of the forced liquidation of ﬂats serving as collateral, we use a somewhat altered formula. The ask price is similar to 
the price of a used ﬂat, but there is an additional discount term (𝐷𝐶), which can even be further augmented in the case of a negative 
macroeconomic shock event, i.e.:
𝑃𝑅𝑎
𝑡,𝑓 =𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 ×(1− 𝑐𝑚𝑝𝑑)𝑝𝑜𝑛
𝑓 ×
{
𝐷𝐶, if 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑠ℎ
𝑡 >𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑑𝑐
𝐷𝐶 ×𝐷𝐶𝑎 otherwise
(A.1)
26 All bids must be greater than or equal to the ask price.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
33
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
where 𝐷𝐶𝑎 represents the augmentation term to the discount factor when the shocked GDP is less than 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑑𝑐 fraction of the base 
GDP.
In the case of newly built ﬂats, the ask price depends on the land and construction costs and the mark-up:
𝑃𝑅𝑐
𝑡,𝑓 =𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓 ×(𝐿𝑃𝑡,𝑁𝑓 +𝐶𝑈𝐶𝑡,𝑅𝑓 )×(1+ 𝜇𝐶
𝑡,𝑅𝑓
) (A.2)
where 𝐿𝑃𝑡,𝑁𝑓 is the land price in the neighbourhood of a given ﬂat 𝑓 in period 𝑡. To calculate 𝐿𝑃𝑡,𝑁𝑓, we take the transactions of 
period 𝑡 −1 in a given neighbourhood and calculate the unit sale price of ﬂats.27
𝐶𝑈𝐶𝑡,𝑅𝑓 is the construction unit cost in the region of the ﬂat. For region 𝑖, it is calculated by taking a base cost (𝐶𝑈𝐶 𝑏), which 
can be altered by the regional average wage (𝑊𝑡,𝑖), other unobserved region speciﬁc factors (𝜃𝐶𝑈𝐶
𝑖 ) and the nominal GDP index 
(𝑃𝑡𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡):
𝐶𝑈𝐶𝑡,𝑖 =𝐶𝑈𝐶 𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 +𝑐𝐶𝑈𝐶 𝑊𝑡,𝑖 (A.3)
𝐶𝑈𝐶 𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑃𝑡𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡 ×𝐶𝑈𝐶 𝑏 ×(1+ 𝜃𝐶𝑈𝐶
𝑖 ) (A.4)
where 𝑐𝐶𝑈𝐶 is an exogenously given parameter.
The construction mark-up (𝜇𝐶
𝑡,𝑖) depends on the tightness of the market which we capture by calculating as the ratio of newly 
built ﬂats sold during construction compared to all newly built ﬂats sold in a given region (𝑆𝑅𝑁𝐵
𝑡,𝑖 ):
𝜇𝐶
𝑡,𝑖 =𝜇𝐶,0 +𝜇𝐶,1 ×𝑆𝑅𝑁𝐵
𝑡,𝑖 (A.5)
where the constant 𝜇𝐶,0 and the coeﬃcient 𝜇𝐶,1 are exogenously given parameters.
Newly built ﬂats can be sold even during construction using the cost-based price (no matter how many periods are left until 
completion). After 𝑝𝑛𝑏𝑎 periods after completion, the construction sector starts adjusting the ask price to converge to the market price 
of the given ﬂat according to the following formula:
𝑃𝑅𝑎
𝑡,𝑓 =𝑃𝑅𝑐
𝑡,𝑓 −(𝑃𝑅𝑐
𝑡,𝑓 −𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓)×(1−(1− 𝛾)𝑝𝑜𝑛
𝑓 −𝑝𝑛𝑏𝑎
), (A.6)
where 𝑝𝑜𝑛
𝑓 is the number of periods passed since completion and 𝛾 is the monthly price convergence rate.
A.2.2. Fictive ﬂats
There are three cases in the simulation where we use ﬁctive ﬂats to support the decision-making process of agents: (i) To determine 
the optimal level of renovation (see A.4.2and A.2.3). (ii) To determine an ideal choice in the housing market which can serve as a 
reference for households and help the construction sector estimate demand for diﬀerent types of newly built ﬂats. Since ﬂats for sale 
in the market can vary period by period (or even within a single period), this ideal choice represents the ﬂat which is worth waiting 
for at current market prices for a given household. Finally, (iii) we use ﬁctive ﬂats also to determine the ideal choice in the rental 
market to help investors estimate rental demand. Intuitively, we can interpret this – and also the situation of the construction sector 
in (ii) – as conducting a market survey supporting investment decisions.
To determine the ideal choice in the housing market, in each period, we generate the set of ﬁctive ﬂats 𝐹𝑓ℎ, which contains 𝑛𝑓
ﬂats in all the buckets in every neighbourhood, randomly selecting a size and a state within the intervals of the bucket. This list 
includes newly built ﬂats as well. For all of these ﬂats, we determine an ask price, which equals the market price in the case of 
non-newly built ﬂats and which equals the cost-based price in the case of newly built ﬂats. In each period 𝑡every household ℎselects 
its ideal ﬂat 𝑓∗
𝑡,ℎ out of the ﬁctive sample based on the consumer surplus (see AppendixA.4.2), considering its preferred regions (see 
AppendixA.4.3).
A.2.3. Renovation
The state of ﬂats deteriorates every month at a predeﬁned rate 𝛿, which can be compensated by the households by renovating 
their home. In each period, households are selected with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑟 to renovate their homes. In this case, they calculate the 
optimal level of renovation using the strategy described in AppendixA.4.2. Flats in the rental market are automatically renovated in 
every period to oﬀset the deterioration of ﬂats.
The cost of renovation of ﬂat 𝑓 to state 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 is denoted by 𝑅𝐶𝑡,𝑓𝑟 and calculated in the following way:
𝑅𝐶𝑡,𝑓𝑟 =(𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 −𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑓)× 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑡,𝑓 ×𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑡,𝑅𝑓 (A.7)
where 𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑡,𝑅𝑓 is the renovation unit cost in the region of ﬂat 𝑓. In region 𝑖
𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑡,𝑖 =𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 +𝑐𝑅𝑈𝐶
1 𝑊𝑡,𝑖 +𝑐𝑅𝑈𝐶
2 𝑊𝑡,𝑖 ×𝜔𝑡,𝑖 (A.8)
𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑃𝑡𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡 ×𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑏 ×(1+ 𝜃𝑅𝑈𝐶
𝑖 ), (A.9)
27 At this point, we ﬁlter for outliers regarding the size of ﬂats and we only consider ﬂats with relatively low state value (i.e. below 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝐿𝑃 ).

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
34
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
where 𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑏 is the base renovation unit cost which can be altered by regional mark-ups (𝜃𝑅𝑈𝐶
𝑖 ) and is always adjusted by the 
nominal GDP index. 𝑐𝑅𝑈𝐶
1 and 𝑐𝑅𝑈𝐶
2 are exogenous parameters. 𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 can be altered as a function of the regional average wage 
(𝑊𝑡,𝑖). We also take into account the extent to which the renovation volume in period 𝑡deviates from the long-term average within 
the region (𝜔𝑡,𝑖). This captures sudden imbalances between supply and demand factors.
A.3. Individuals
Individuals may be referred to as adults or children. Children live with their adult parents until they form an own household. 
Individual 𝑖is characterized by the following attributes:
• 𝑎𝑡,𝑖: Age of individual 𝑖in period 𝑡
• 𝑒𝑖: Educational level of individual 𝑖
• 𝑤0
𝑖: Real starting wage of individual 𝑖
• 𝑤𝑒𝑖,𝑡: Work experience of individual 𝑖in period 𝑡
• 𝑠𝑒𝑥𝑖: Sex of individual 𝑖
Each individual may live up to 𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑥 periods, but in each period it may die with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑑 which is dependent on 𝑠𝑒𝑥𝑖, 𝑒𝑖
and 𝑎𝑡,𝑖. Each individual starts working at age 𝑎𝑤
𝑒𝑖
and retires at age 𝑎𝑝
𝑒𝑖. Individuals can receive wage income or pension income. In 
addition to these, households can receive rent income and transfers. The net potential income of an adult individual 𝑖is
𝑊𝑝
𝑡,𝑖 =
{
𝑃𝑡𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡 ×(1− 𝑟𝑇𝐴𝑋
𝑡 )× 𝑤0
𝑖 ×𝑊𝑅𝑒𝑖,𝑤𝑒𝑖,𝑡, ifind. 𝑖isactive
𝑝𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑖 ×𝑃𝑡𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡 ×(1− 𝑟𝑇𝐴𝑋
𝑡 )× 𝑤0
𝑖 ×𝑊𝑅𝑒𝑖,𝑤𝑒𝑖,𝑡, ifind. 𝑖isretired,
(A.10)
where 𝑊𝑅𝑒𝑖,𝑤𝑒𝑖,𝑡 is the wage ratio of a given educational level and work experience. 𝑊𝑅 is exogenously given and based on empirical 
data. Its elements can be interpreted as multipliers. The real starting wage and the multipliers of 𝑊𝑅 deﬁne the wage dynamics of an 
individual. This is then adjusted with the nominal GDP index. Pension income is a 𝑝𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑖 fraction of the last real wage earned (pension 
replacement rate), again, adjusted with the nominal GDP index. The net income of an individual (𝑊𝑡,𝑖) equals 𝑊𝑝
𝑡,𝑖 if an individual is 
employed or retired, and 0 in the case of unemployment.
We also introduce a lifetime income of individuals (𝐿𝑇𝐼𝑡,𝑖) which is taken into account in the decision-making process of house 
purchases. It is updated every month and it consists of two parts: earned (already accumulated) wage income (𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑎
𝑡,𝑖) and expected 
future income (𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑒
𝑡,𝑖).
𝐿𝑇𝐼𝑡,𝑖 =𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑎
𝑡,𝑖 +𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑒
𝑡,𝑖, (A.11)
where
𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑎
𝑡,𝑖 =
{
𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑎
𝑡−1,𝑖 +𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡 ×(1− 𝑟𝑇𝐴𝑋
𝑡 )× 𝑤0
𝑖 ×𝑊𝑅𝑒𝑖,𝑤𝑒𝑖,𝑡, foremployedindividuals
𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑎
𝑡−1,𝑖, otherwise
(A.12)
𝐿𝑇𝐼 𝑒
𝑡,𝑖 =
𝑡+min{𝑝𝐿𝑇𝐼 ,𝑝𝑢𝑟
𝑡,𝑖}
∑
𝑠=𝑡+1
𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑏
𝑠 ×𝑆𝐴𝑠,𝑖 ×(1− 𝑟𝑇𝐴𝑋
𝑠 )× 𝑤0
𝑖 ×𝑊𝑅𝑒𝑖,𝑤𝑒𝑖,𝑠 (A.13)
𝑆𝐴𝑠,𝑖 =
{
1, if 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑠ℎ
𝑡 =1
𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑠ℎ
𝑠 ×(1− 𝑢𝑠,𝑒𝑖), if 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑠ℎ
𝑡 <1
(A.14)
When calculating expected future income, individuals consider 𝑝𝐿𝑇𝐼 periods, or the number of periods left until retirement age 
(𝑝𝑢𝑟
𝑡,𝑖), whichever number is lower. In normal times, individuals do not consider the possibility of being unemployed, as opposed to 
crisis periods, in which they adjust downward their expected income, governed by 𝑆𝐴𝑠,𝑖. According to these formulas, the lifetime 
income keeps growing, and hence, households will be willing to pay more for housing. The available lifetime income reaches its 
maximum 𝑝𝐿𝑇𝐼 periods before retirement.
A.3.1. Demographic events
Marriage
An unmarried woman 𝑖 tries to marry an unmarried man with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑚
𝑒𝑖,𝑎𝑡,𝑖
, which indicates that it depends on the age 
and the educational level of the woman. Before forming couples, we group the unmarried men into groups according to region, age, 
educational level and starting wage. Then, for each marrying woman we randomly select a group of the same region and then assign 
a husband from this group. The probability of selecting a speciﬁc group is determined by looking at the characteristics of couples 
identiﬁed in the Central Credit Registry. For the sake of simplicity, the parameters of the newly formed household will be the same 
as those of the wife’s previous household.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
35
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Birth
In each period, every married woman gives birth to a child with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑏
𝑒𝑖,𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑛𝑐
𝑡,𝑖
, where 𝑛𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 is the number of previous births 
of woman 𝑖. These probabilities were determined using the identiﬁed births in the Pension Payment database. The child inherits the 
educational level of the more highly qualiﬁed parent as well as the higher starting wage of the two parents.
Death
In each period, individuals may die with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑑
𝑎𝑡,𝑖,𝑠𝑒𝑥𝑖,𝑒𝑖
. If they die and they were the last adult of a household, they 
bequeath their properties and deposits to an inheritor. If they had children, the oldest child receives the inheritance; otherwise we 
randomly select a household to inherit.
A.4. Households
Households may consist of one or two adults (𝐴𝑖,𝑡 denotes the set of adults in household 𝑖in period 𝑡) and children (𝐶𝑖,𝑡 denotes 
the set of children in household 𝑖in period 𝑡).
An individual 𝑖 forms a new household when marrying or when reaching age 𝑎𝑤
𝑒𝑖
.28 When a child leaves its parents’ household 
and forms a new one, it inherits the parameters of the parents’ household (e.g. for the utility function). If the parents own a home, 
then the child inherits a fraction 𝑟𝑑𝑖 (deposit inheritance ratio) of the parent household’s deposits. Additionally, individuals may 
also inherit a deposit which is worth the market value of the parents’ home. The probability of such an inheritance increases as the 
average starting wage of the parents increases. These rules are set in a way to compensate for the missing capital income in the 
model and to match the empirical down payment data of ﬁrst-time buyers.
A.4.1. Consumption
The level of consumption depends on several factors (described below), but most importantly on the wage and size of the 
household; furthermore, it may be constrained by the available deposits. Hence, it is important to establish the order of cash ﬂows 
for households to determine their consumption. Firstly, we account for the transactions in the housing market.29 Secondly, households 
receive their wage (or pension) and they pay/get rents. Only after these can they make their decision on the level of consumption by 
taking into account their ideal saving rate as well as their monthly instalments in the following way:
In each period 𝑡, a household 𝑖calculates a target savings rate (𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑡,𝑖) and a minimum consumption (𝑐𝑚
𝑡,𝑖). It aims to save a fraction 
𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑡,𝑖 of its actual household income (𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖) upon paying monthly instalments (𝑀𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖) and the rent (𝑅ℎ
𝑡,𝑖) and consumes the rest of 𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖, 
but before accumulating any savings it tries to achieve the minimum consumption. Thus, the consumption (𝐶ℎ
𝑡,𝑖) can be calculated as 
follows:
𝐶ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 =
{
𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 ×(1− 𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑡,𝑖)− 𝑀𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 −𝑅ℎ
𝑡,𝑖, if 𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 >𝑐 𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 +𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑡,𝑖𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 +𝑀𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 +𝑅ℎ
𝑡,𝑖
min(𝑐𝑚
𝑡,𝑖,𝐷𝑐
𝑡,𝑖)
(A.15)
where 𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 contains the sum of the net income of the adults (𝑊ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 = ∑
𝑗 𝑊𝑡𝑗 , 𝑗 ∈ 𝐴𝑖,𝑡) and also family beneﬁts 𝐹𝐵ℎ
𝑖,𝑡, which is set by 
the government depending on the number of children under 18 in the household. We deﬁne 𝐷𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 as the deposit at the time of the 
consumption decision, because the amount of deposits can change within one period in the model.
𝑀𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 and 𝑅ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 are calculated in a straightforward way:
𝑀𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 =
∑
𝑙
𝑀𝐼𝑡,𝑙,𝑙 ∈𝐿𝑖,𝑡 (A.16)
𝑅ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 =
{
𝑅𝑓
𝑡,𝑗, ifhousehold 𝑖rentsaﬂat 𝑗
0, otherwise
(A.17)
where 𝐿𝑖,𝑡 is the set of active loan contracts of household 𝑖in period 𝑡and 𝑀𝐼𝑡,𝑙 is the monthly instalment on loan 𝑙.
The target saving rate (𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑡,𝑖) depends on the actual net income of the household without family beneﬁts:
𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑡,𝑖 =𝑐𝑡𝑠𝑟
0 +𝑐𝑡𝑠𝑟 ×log(𝑊ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 ×12∕𝑃𝑡) (A.18)
where 𝑐𝑡𝑠𝑟
0 and 𝑐𝑡𝑠𝑟 are parameters.
To calculate 𝑐𝑚
𝑡,𝑖, we apply the following strategy. Firstly, we deﬁne the subsistence consumption level of a household (𝑐𝑠
𝑡,𝑖) based 
on its size (which is independent of the household’s income). Then we deﬁne an income-based consumption level (𝑐𝑖
𝑡,𝑖). This is 
calculated as the 𝑟𝑚𝑐 fraction of the net potential income of the household without family beneﬁts (𝑊𝑝ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 ). The household tries to 
achieve a minimum consumption of whichever of the two consumption levels is higher, but if it does not have enough deposits to 
do so, in practice it starts reducing the eﬀective income-based consumption target 𝑐𝑖
𝑡,𝑖, approaching the subsistence level 𝑐𝑠
𝑡,𝑖 in 𝑝𝑚𝑐
periods. These rules can be speciﬁed according to the following formulas:
28 When children leave the parents’ household they do not necessarily buy or rent an own ﬂat, but they start accumulating deposits. This represents the period of 
young adults’ life when they still live with their parents, but have already started to accumulate savings. The lower their starting wage is, the longer this period lasts.
29 This order is used for technical reasons: when a household bids on a ﬂat, it considers its deposits accumulated until the beginning of the given month.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
36
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
𝑐𝑠
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 ×𝑛𝑢𝑒
𝑡,𝑖 (A.19)
𝑐𝑖
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑟𝑚𝑐𝑊𝑝ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 (A.20)
𝑐𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 =
{
max{𝑐𝑠
𝑡,𝑖,𝑐𝑖
𝑡,𝑖}, if 𝐷𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 >max{𝑐𝑠
𝑡,𝑖,𝑐𝑖
𝑡,𝑖}
𝑐𝑖
𝑡,𝑖 −min{𝑝𝑚𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 ,𝑝𝑚𝑐}∕𝑝𝑚𝑐 ×(𝑐𝑖
𝑡,𝑖 −𝑐𝑠
𝑡,𝑖), otherwise,
(A.21)
where 𝑝𝑚𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 is the number of periods since the household has to spend all its deposits trying to achieve the minimum consumption, 
𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 is the per capita minimum subsistence level of the household and 𝑛𝑢𝑒
𝑡,𝑖 is the number of unit equivalents of the household. The 
ﬁrst adult’s equivalent is 1, and for any other member above age 𝑎𝑎𝑠𝑝𝑐, it is 𝑤𝑎𝑠𝑝𝑐, below that it is 𝑤𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐.30
A.4.2. Utility function
Each household in the model has a reservation price function which assigns a utility to ﬂats expressed in monetary terms. We 
calibrated several diﬀerent functional forms,31 and chose the one ﬁtting best to the empirical observations. Our ﬁnal choice is shown 
by the following equation:
𝑅𝑃𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 =(𝐹𝐶𝑟𝑝
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 +𝑁𝐸𝐼𝐺𝐻 𝑟𝑝
𝑓,𝑖)∗ 𝐿𝑇𝐼 ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 ∗𝑃𝑡 +𝑁𝐵𝑓
𝑡,𝑖 (A.23)
where 𝑅𝑃𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 is the reservation price of household 𝑖 in period 𝑡 for ﬂat 𝑓, 𝐹𝐶𝑟𝑝
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 encompasses ﬂat characteristics (size and state), 
𝑁𝐸𝐼𝐺𝐻 𝑟𝑝
𝑓,𝑖 captures neighbourhood quality, 𝐿𝑇𝐼 ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 is the available real lifetime income (𝐿𝑇𝐼 ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 = ∑
𝑗 𝐿𝑇𝐼𝑡,𝑗, 𝑗 ∈𝐴𝑡,𝑖) and 𝑁𝐵𝑓
𝑡,𝑖 is the 
additional utility in the case of newly built ﬂats.
As can be seen in Equation (A.23), ﬂat characteristics and neighbourhood quality are handled separately. The intuition behind 
this is that the utility gain of living in a given neighbourhood captures aspects such as commuting time, air quality, public security, 
noise and light pollution, etc. which are the same regardless of the size and state of the ﬂat itself.32
The expansions of the parts regarding ﬂat and neighbourhood characteristics are the following:
𝐹𝐶𝑟𝑝
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 =𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑠
𝑖 ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑠
𝑖
𝑓 ×(1+ 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑞
𝑖 ×𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑞
𝑖
𝑡,𝑓 ) (A.24)
𝑁𝐸𝐼𝐺𝐻 𝑟𝑝
𝑓,𝑖 =
𝜎1,𝑖
(1+exp(− 𝑄𝑁𝑓 ))1∕𝜎2,𝑖
(A.25)
where 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓, 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑓 and 𝑄𝑁𝑓 are, respectively, the size, state and neighbourhood quality of ﬂat 𝑓, while 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑠, 𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑠, 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑞, 𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑞, 𝜎1, and 
𝜎2 are parameters determined by the calibration process.
The interpretation of the sigmoid function form in the case of neighbourhood quality is that each household might have a 
preferred quality level from which it would be very costly to deviate downwards in terms of utility, but at the same time moving 
upwards would only mean less and less additional gain.
Moreover, the reservation price function also contains an additional utility gain in the case of newly built ﬂats. Two factors are 
contributing to this component: (i) in Hungary, households can receive a transfer from the state in the case of purchasing a newly 
built ﬂat, and thus this transfer 𝑇𝑅𝑓
𝑡,𝑖 directly increases the reservation price. (ii) There can be an inherent motivation of households 
to live in a newly built environment. We assume that this gain interacts with the size of the ﬂat similarly to the base case and is more 
pronounced in higher quality neighbourhoods:
𝑁𝐵𝑓
𝑡,𝑖 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
(𝑐𝑛𝑏𝑎0 +𝑐𝑛𝑏𝑎1 ×𝑄𝑁𝑓 )× 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑠
𝑖 ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑠
𝑖
𝑓 ×𝐿𝑇𝐼 ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 +𝑇𝑅𝑓
𝑡,𝑖, if 𝑓 isnewlybuilt
0, otherwise
(A.26)
Adjusting the reservation price considering renovation possibilities
When purchasing a ﬂat, we allow 𝑟𝑟 fraction of the households to consider renovation; hence, we also deﬁne 𝑅𝑃𝑓′
𝑡,𝑖 as the 
reservation price for a ﬂat with optimal renovation. To determine the optimal level of renovation for ﬂat 𝑓, we apply the following 
strategy. First, we generate a set of ﬁctive ﬂats (𝐹𝑟
𝑓) which are identical to the ﬂat in consideration except for their state attribute.33
30 Since there are many households in Hungary living under the legal subsistence level, we could not take simply the legal subsistence level as 𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 . Hence, besides 
the oﬃcial (upper) per capita subsistence level we also introduced an eﬀective lower subsistence level (𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢 and 𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙), and 𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 can vary within this range, depending 
on the net potential per capita income of the household (𝑊𝑝𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 = ∑
𝑗 𝑊𝑝
𝑡,𝑗∕(𝑛(𝐴𝑖,𝑡) +𝑛(𝐶𝑖,𝑡)), 𝑗 ∈𝐴𝑖,𝑡):
𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑃𝑡 ×𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡 ×
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙,if 𝑊𝑝𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 <𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙
𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢,if 𝑊𝑝𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 >𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢
𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙 +
𝑊𝑝𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 −𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙
𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢−𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙 ×(𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢 −𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙),otherwise
, (A.22)
where 𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙 and 𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢 are threshold parameters regarding 𝑊𝑝𝑝𝑐
𝑡,𝑖 .
31 The detailed description of these calibration results can be found in 3.2.
32 There can be arguments also for separating size and state, but the results of the calibration suggest some interaction between the two.
33 The state of these ﬁctive ﬂats is 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑓 plus an integer multiple of 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑟 (renovation interval), but state cannot exceed 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
37
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
As a next step, we calculate for each of these ﬁctive ﬂats (𝑓𝑟 ∈𝐹𝑟
𝑓) the consumer surplus (𝑆𝑃𝑓𝑟
𝑡,𝑖 ) considering the eﬀective cost of 
renovation (𝑅𝐶𝑒
𝑡,𝑓𝑟):
𝑆𝑃𝑡,𝑓𝑟,𝑖 =𝑅𝑃𝑡,𝑓𝑟,𝑖 −𝑃𝑅𝑎
𝑡,𝑓 −𝑅𝐶𝑒
𝑡,𝑓𝑟 (A.27)
where 𝑃𝑅𝑎
𝑡,𝑓 is the ask price of the original ﬂat. The eﬀective renovation cost has two components: (i) market renovation cost (𝑅𝐶𝑡,𝑓𝑟, 
see AppendixA.2.3) which is to be paid, and (ii) a non-material burden (including psychological costs and time demand) captured 
as a fraction 𝜈 of the market renovation cost.
Households choose the renovation level ensuring a state with the highest surplus (and the underlying ﬁctive ﬂat 𝑓∗). Finally, the 
adjusted reservation price for ﬂat 𝑓 is the diﬀerence between 𝑓∗’s reservation price (𝑅𝑃𝑡,𝑓∗,𝑖) and the corresponding renovation cost:
𝑅𝑃𝑎
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 =𝑅𝑃𝑓∗
𝑡,𝑓∗,𝑖 −𝑅𝐶𝑒
𝑡,𝑓𝑟 (A.28)
A.4.3. Commitment to regions
Every household has a preferred region to live in, and they only consider the ﬂats of that region in their housing decisions. 
However, to take into account the most typical tendencies of Hungarian internal migration we introduce an exception: ﬁrst-time 
buyers have the option to move outside of the region of their origin. Depending on region-dependent probabilities 𝑝𝑓𝑏, some ﬁrst-
time buyers can evaluate the ﬂats of a second preferred region as well: for households from Budapest the second preferred region is 
the agglomeration of the capital (Pest county), for all the other households it is Budapest. This aﬀects all the housing decisions of 
households (choice of ideal ﬂat, the decision on moving, placing bids and rental decisions).
A.4.4. Decision on moving
Household 𝑖 in period 𝑡 may be selected to consider moving with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 based on the age of the oldest adult of the 
household (𝑎𝑜
𝑡,𝑖):
𝑝𝑟𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑝𝑟𝑚
𝑓, if 𝑎𝑜
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑎𝑚
𝑓
𝑝𝑟𝑚
0 , if 𝑎𝑜
𝑡,𝑖 <=𝑎𝑚
0 and 𝑎𝑜
𝑡,𝑖 ≠𝑎𝑚
𝑓
𝑝𝑟𝑚
0 ×𝑀𝑃𝐷 𝑎𝑜
𝑡,𝑖−𝑎𝑚
0 otherwise
(A.29)
where 𝑝𝑟𝑚
0 is the probability of moving under age 𝑎𝑚
0, and 𝑀𝑃𝐷 is the moving probability decay parameter. This formula (with the 
current parameter set) implies that most households would consider moving when reaching age 𝑎𝑚
𝑓 with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑚
𝑓, but there is 
a basic probability of moving as well, which is a decreasing function of age.
If household 𝑖is selected to consider moving, it ﬁrst compares the consumer surplus of its ideal ﬁctive ﬂat (𝑓∗
𝑡,𝑖) and its own home 
(ℎ𝑡,𝑖), calculating the surplus deviation rate 𝑠𝑝𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖:
𝑠𝑝𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖 =(𝑆𝑃𝑡,𝑓∗
𝑡,𝑖
−𝑆𝑃𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑖)∕𝑆𝑃𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑖. (A.30)
If 𝑠𝑝𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖 exceeds a threshold 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑚, then the household compares the market prices, the sizes, the neighbourhood qualities of the ideal 
ﬁctive ﬂat and its own home, calculating the price deviation rate 𝑝𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖, the size deviation rate 𝑠𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖 and the neighbourhood quality 
deviation rate 𝑞𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖 in absolute terms:
𝑝𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖 = |𝑃𝑅𝑙
𝑡,𝑓∗
𝑡,𝑖
−𝑃𝑅𝑙
𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑖
|∕𝑃𝑅𝑙
𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑖
(A.31)
𝑠𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖 = |𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓∗
𝑡,𝑖
−𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒ℎ𝑡,𝑖 |∕𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒ℎ𝑡,𝑖 (A.32)
𝑞𝑑𝑟∗
𝑡,𝑖 = |𝑄𝑁𝑓∗𝑡,𝑖
−𝑄𝑁ℎ𝑡,𝑖
|∕𝑄𝑁ℎ𝑡,𝑖
(A.33)
If any of these rates exceed 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑚, and the household can ﬁnance the ideal ﬁctive ﬂat, then it decides to move and places its home on 
the market.
A.5. Transactions in the housing market
There are three distinct types of purchases in the housing market: purchases of the (i) construction sector, (ii) buy-to-let investors, 
and (iii) home buyers. The sequence of the purchases in the simulation also follows this order.
A.5.1. Purchases of the construction sector
The construction sector determines the additional quantity of ﬂats to build in each bucket 𝑖 (𝑛𝑁𝐵𝑃
𝑡,𝑖 ). This decision is based on 
the ﬁctive choices of households in the housing market, i.e. demand for newly built houses, and the stock of newly built ﬂats of the 
construction sector (𝑛𝑁𝐵
𝑡,𝑖 , including ﬂats under construction). 𝑛𝑁𝐵𝑃
𝑡,𝑖 is set according to the following formula:
𝑛𝑁𝐵𝑃
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑁𝐵𝐷
𝑡,𝑖 ×(1+ 𝑇𝑁𝐵𝐵 )× 𝑝𝐶 −𝑛𝑁𝐵
𝑡,𝑖 (A.34)
where 𝑁𝐵𝐷
𝑡,𝑖 is the average demand for newly built ﬂats in bucket 𝑖 in the past 𝑝𝑁𝐵𝐷 periods, 𝑇𝑁𝐵𝐵 is the target buﬀer rate of 
newly built ﬂats, and 𝑝𝐶 is the duration of construction expressed in periods. 𝑁𝐵𝐷
𝑡,𝑖 is the number of households planning to buy a

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
38
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
ﬂat – let them be ﬁrst-time buyers or movers – whose ideal ﬁctive ﬂat is a newly built ﬂat in bucket 𝑖. For example, let us assume 
that the average demand in bucket 𝑖for newly built ﬂats was 100, and there are 1,400 ﬂats under construction and 200 ﬂats ready. 
If the buﬀer rate is 10%, and construction takes 18 periods, then the construction sector aims to have 100 ×18  ×1.1 =1980 ﬂats in 
its stock, and so it plans to start the construction of 1980 −1400  −200  =380 ﬂats. If demand stays constant, it will be able to satisfy 
the accumulated demand (due to the buﬀer even a slightly higher demand), and in the long run it will start constructing 100 ﬂats in 
each period. To avoid huge spikes, 𝑛𝑁𝐵𝑃
𝑡,𝑖 may not exceed a fraction 𝑟𝑁𝐵
𝑚𝑎𝑥 of 𝑁𝐵𝐷
𝑡,𝑖.
In order to start building a new house, the construction sector must have free land area in the proper neighbourhood, which is 
a fraction 𝑟𝐿𝐴 of the area of the ﬂat to build. Whenever the construction sector purchases a used ﬂat, the ﬂat area is added to its 
free land area in the neighbourhood,34 and whenever the construction of a new ﬂat 𝑓 begins in the neighbourhood, this land area 
decreases by 𝑟𝐿𝐴 ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑓. In each period 𝑡 for each bucket 𝑖, the construction sector determines 𝑛𝑁𝐵𝑃
𝑡,𝑖 , and determines the sizes of 
the ﬂats to build randomly within the size interval of the given bucket. Summing the sizes of these ﬂats for each neighbourhood 𝑛
(𝐴𝑑
𝑛), the construction sector needs to have a free land area of 𝑟𝐿𝐴 ×𝐴𝑑
𝑛. If its land area is less, then it starts purchasing ﬂats in the 
neighbourhood until the land area exceeds the volume needed. The construction sector buys ﬂats sequentially out of the ﬂats for 
sale, and every time it purchases the ﬂat of the cheapest unit price (independently of its size) in the given neighbourhood. In this 
case the transaction price equals the list price.
A.5.2. Purchases for investment purposes
Purchases for investment purposes can be made either by the professional investor or buy-to-let investor households. Since the 
professional investor is a representative agent, it makes large-scale investment decisions in several segments of the market at the 
same time. Its decision-making mechanism partly diﬀers from that of the disaggregated household investors, since while single buy-
to-let investors make binary decisions, the representative professional investor needs to make a decision on the aggregate investment 
volume as well.
The basic logic in the case of the professional investor is the following: Firstly, it decides how much to invest in each neighbour-
hood 𝑛 (𝑃𝐼𝑉 𝑒
𝑡,𝑛), and it purchases ﬂats sequentially until it reaches the desired investment volume. When choosing the next ﬂat to 
buy, the professional investor randomly selects a bucket 𝑖 with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑏
𝑡,𝑖, and purchases the ﬂat with the cheapest unit cost 
in the bucket. By contrast, single households may invest by purchasing only one ﬂat at a time. For each household, we assign a 
neighbourhood 𝑛 with selection probability 𝑝𝑟𝑠
𝑡,𝑛 in which it tries to invest with investment probability 𝑝𝑟𝑖
𝑡,𝑛. If the household tries to 
invest in neighbourhood 𝑛, it selects a bucket the same way as the professional investor (with probability 𝑝𝑟𝑏
𝑡,𝑖). If it can manage 
to ﬁnance the purchase of the ﬂat with the cheapest unit cost in the bucket, it will buy it, otherwise it will not invest in the given 
period.
Both 𝑃𝐼𝑉 𝑒
𝑡,𝑛 and 𝑝𝑟𝑖
𝑡,𝑛 depend on the expected return spread:
𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑡,𝑛 =𝐸𝑅𝑡,𝑛 −𝐼𝑅𝑏
𝑡 (A.35)
where 𝐼𝑅𝑏
𝑡 is the base interest rate and 𝐸𝑅𝑡,𝑛 is the expected return on investment, which is calculated as the average return in 
renting out ﬂats in neighbourhood 𝑛in the past 12 months:
𝐸𝑅𝑡,𝑛 =
𝑡−1∑
𝑠=𝑡−12
𝐵𝑇𝐿𝑟
𝑠,𝑛∕12 (A.36)
where 𝐵𝑇𝐿𝑟
𝑡,𝑛 is the monthly return which can be realized by renting out ﬂats in neighbourhood 𝑛in period 𝑡. It can be calculated as:
𝐵𝑇𝐿𝑟
𝑡,𝑛 =
∑
𝑓
𝑅𝐼𝑡,𝑓∕
∑
𝑓
𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓,𝑓 ∈𝑅𝑡,𝑛, (A.37)
𝑅𝐼𝑡,𝑓 =
{
0,if 𝑓 isvacant
𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓if 𝑓 isrented
(A.38)
where 𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓 is the market price, 𝑅𝑡,𝑛 is the set of ﬂats in the rental market (rented or vacant) in neighbourhood 𝑛, 𝑅𝐼𝑡,𝑓 is the rent 
income on ﬂat 𝑓, and 𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓 is the market rental price of ﬂat 𝑓 (see A.7).
After calculating 𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑡,𝑛 using (A.35)-(A.38), the planned (expected) investment value by the professional investor in neighbour-
hood 𝑛is:
𝑃𝐼𝑉 𝑒
𝑡,𝑛 =(𝑐𝑃𝐼𝑅
0 +𝑐𝑃𝐼𝑅
1 𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑡,𝑛)×
∑
𝑓
𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡−1,𝑓,𝑓 ∈𝑅𝑡−1,𝑛, (A.39)
where 𝑐𝑃𝐼𝑅
0 and 𝑐𝑃𝐼𝑅
1 are exogenous parameters and 𝑅𝑡−1,𝑛 is the set of ﬂats of the rental market (rented or vacant) in neighbourhood 
𝑛in the previous period.
Consequently, as the expected return spread increases, the professional investor plans to invest a higher fraction of the market 
value of the ﬂats at the rental market. However, we also apply an upper constraint: 𝑃𝐼𝑉 𝑒
𝑡,𝑛 may not exceed 𝑃𝐼𝑉 𝑒,𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑡,𝑛 , which is a 
fraction 𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑃𝐼𝑀𝑉 of the total market value of the ﬂats in the neighbourhood:
34 Demolishing the purchased ﬂat to increase the free land area does not have a cost in the model.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
39
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
𝑃𝐼𝑉 𝑒,𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑡,𝑛 =𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑃𝐼𝑀𝑉 ×
∑
𝑓
𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡−1,𝑓,𝑓 ∈𝐹𝑡−1,𝑛 (A.40)
Now we can also deﬁne the investment probabilityof households in neighbourhood 𝑛, which is an increasing function of 𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑡,𝑛:
𝑝𝑟𝑖
𝑡,𝑛 =
{
0,if 𝐸𝑅𝑆𝑡,𝑛 <0
max{𝑝𝑟𝑖
𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑐𝑖𝐸𝑅𝑆𝛼𝑖
𝑡,𝑛},otherwise
, (A.41)
where 𝑝𝑟𝑖
𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the cap of household investment probability and 𝑐𝑖 and 𝛼𝑖 are exogenously given parameters.
The selection probability of neighbourhood 𝑖 is proportionate to 𝑛𝑚𝑛
𝑡,𝑖 , which is the diﬀerence between the number of ﬂats needed 
to satisfy the estimated (ﬁctive) rental demand (𝐹𝐷𝑅𝑛
𝑡−1,𝑖, see A.7) with a target vacancy rate of 𝑇𝑉𝑅 and the actual number of ﬂats 
on the rental market in the neighbourhood (𝑛(𝑅𝑡−1,𝑖)):
𝑛𝑚𝑛
𝑡,𝑖 =𝐹𝐷𝑅𝑛
𝑡−1,𝑖∕(1− 𝑇𝑉𝑅 )− 𝑛(𝑅𝑡−1,𝑖) (A.42)
Finally, we need to elaborate on 𝑝𝑟𝑏
𝑡,𝑛 for neighbourhood 𝑛. We designed the investment mechanism such that the series of single 
investment decisions tend to result in a more or less even vacancy rate (𝐸𝑉𝑅 𝑡,𝑛) across buckets in a given neighbourhood (𝐵𝑛). Let 
𝑛𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 denote the number of ﬂats missing in the rental market in bucket 𝑖to achieve the vacancy rate 𝐸𝑉𝑅 𝑡,𝑛. We calculate 𝑛𝑚
𝑡,𝑖 for every 
bucket in the neighbourhood and 𝐸𝑉𝑅 𝑡,𝑛 endogenously, by solving the following equation:
𝑃𝐼𝑉 𝑒
𝑡 +𝐻𝐼𝑉𝑡−1,𝑛 =
∑
𝑖
(𝐹𝐷𝑅𝑏
𝑡,𝑖∕(1− 𝐸𝑉𝑅 𝑡,𝑛)− 𝑅𝑏
𝑡,𝑖)× 𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑠𝑓𝑖
𝑖∈𝐵𝑛, (A.43)
where 𝐻𝐼𝑉𝑡−1,𝑛 is the investment volume of household investors in period 𝑡 −1 in neighbourhood 𝑛and 𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑠𝑓𝑖
is the market price 
of a sample ﬂat in bucket 𝑖with the mean size and state of the bucket. The left hand side captures the expected investment volume of the 
professional investor and households together, using adaptive expectations for household investment. The right hand side captures 
the ﬁnancing need of purchasing the missing ﬂats to achieve a vacancy rate 𝐸𝑉𝑅 𝑡,𝑛.
Since investment decisions are directly governed by the expected return spread, the supply side can be temporarily detached from 
the demand side, managing to generate disequilibrium outcomes in some segments of the rental market. This mechanism is further 
ampliﬁed by the potential overshooting on the supply side coming from the asynchronous decision-making of autonomous agents. 
Additionally, the endogenous change in rental mark-ups (see A.7) ensures the long-term convergence to an equilibrium state.
A.5.3. Purchases of owner occupiers
While the construction sector and buy-to-let investors purchase ﬂats at the ask price, owner occupiers engage in a bidding process. 
Every bid must be at least as high as the ask price: hence, owner occupiers on average will pay higher prices than the construction 
and the investment sector. This enables the model to reﬂect the weaker bargaining power of owner occupiers.
Owner occupiers may purchase ﬂats in multiple (𝑛𝑟) rounds. In each round, households which are still willing to buy a home 
place bids on ﬂats. We then go through the ﬂats sequentially (in a random order), and the household with the highest bid purchases 
the ﬂat. If there is only one bidder, the transaction price equals the ask price, otherwise it equals the second highest bid, which 
corresponds to the logic of a Vickrey auction. If a household purchases a ﬂat, all of its other bids are withdrawn and the household 
does not enter the next bidding round.
As discussed in Appendix A.2.2, each household has an ideal ﬂat 𝑓∗
𝑡,ℎ in mind. It serves as a reference when actually deciding 
which ﬂats to bid on. In each round of bidding, households willing to buy a ﬂat go through the list of 𝐹𝑖 available ﬂats they might be 
interested in (see AppendixA.4.3) and they evaluate at most 𝑛𝐸 ﬂats. For each evaluated ﬂat, they calculate an adjusted reservation 
price 𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 as a function of 𝑝𝑤𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 which is the number of periods since they started trying but did not manage to buy a ﬂat:
𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 =
{
𝑅𝑃𝑎
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖, if 𝑝𝑤𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 =1
𝑅𝑃𝑎
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 +(𝑆𝑃𝑡,𝑓∗,𝑖 −𝑆𝑃𝑡,𝑓,𝑖)×min{ 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑎(𝑝𝑤𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 )𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑎,𝑅𝑃𝐴 𝑚𝑎𝑥}, otherwise
, (A.44)
where 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑎, 𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑎 and 𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑥 are exogenously given parameters. That is, we use the reservation price (considering also optimal 
renovation, see Appendix A.4.2), which can be increased as the household unsuccessfully spends more and more periods on the 
market. The maximum adjustment is an 𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑥 fraction of the diﬀerence in the consumer surpluses of the ideal ﬁctive ﬂat and the 
ﬂat in consideration.
The adjusted reservation price 𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 implies an adjusted consumer surplus 𝑆𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 = 𝑆𝑃𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 +𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 −𝑅𝑃𝑎
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖. If 𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 >
𝑃𝑅𝑎
𝑡,𝑓, then the household places a bid on ﬂat 𝑓 with a probability of 𝑝𝑏
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖:
𝑝𝑏
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 =max{1,(𝑐𝑃𝑃𝐵 𝑝𝑤𝑏
𝑡,𝑖 +1)× 𝑆𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖∕𝑆𝑃𝑡,𝑓∗,𝑖}, (A.45)
where 𝑐𝑃𝑃𝐵 is an exogenously given parameter. Hence, the closer the adjusted consumer surplus is to the consumer surplus in the 
case of the ideal ﬁctive ﬂat, the higher the probability for a household to bid on a ﬂat. This probability increases as the household 
spends more and more periods on the market unsuccessfully. Placing more bids increases the possibility of being the highest bidder 
for one of the bidded ﬂats. However, a household can place at most 𝑛𝐵 bids. If the number of bids would exceed 𝑛𝐵, only the ﬂats 
with the highest consumer surpluses will be considered.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
40
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
The bid is the weighted average of the adjusted reservation price of the household and the ask price of the ﬂat. Moreover, the bid 
can be limited by the available credit on the ﬂat:
𝑏𝑖𝑑𝑓
𝑡,𝑖 =min{𝑤𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 +(1− 𝑤𝑅𝑃𝐴)𝑃𝑅𝑙
𝑡,𝑓,𝐷𝑡,𝑖 +𝐶𝑅𝐸𝐷𝐼𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 }, (A.46)
where 𝑤𝑅𝑃𝐴 is the weight of the adjusted reservation price, 𝐷𝑡,𝑖 is the amount of deposit and 𝐶𝑅𝐸𝐷𝐼𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 is the maximum available 
credit for ﬂat 𝑓 for household 𝑖(see AppendixA.6).
By assigning a relatively low value to parameter 𝑤𝑅𝑃𝐴, in most cases all of the bids will exceed the ask price only by a slight 
margin; however, the bidding mechanism is still capable of eﬀectively allocating the ﬂats to the bidders which value them the most. 
The increase of 𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 (after spending more and more periods on the market) will raise both the probability of placing a bid and 
the bid itself. Both mechanisms enhance the chance of purchasing a ﬂat, although at the same time the household may have to settle 
for a lower consumer surplus.
A.6. Credit market
In the model there are three types of loans: regular housing loans, bridge loans and renovation loans. Housing loans and bridge 
loans are mortgage loans, and each ﬂat can serve as a collateral for at most one loan contract at a time. Regular housing loans and 
bridge loans are issued at the time of purchase, while renovation loans are issued at renovation. Housing loans and renovation loans 
are used for diﬀerent purposes, from the bank’s perspective they are treated in the same way: both are annuity loans and need to 
comply with the DSTI and LTV regulation.
Bridge loans can be issued for marketable ﬂats, which are deﬁned by two criteria in the model: (i) the market price should exceed 
a threshold 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝐵𝐿 (eliminating cheap rural houses), and (ii) the unit price of the ﬂat should exceed the renovation unit cost in the 
region of the ﬂat. The bridge loan can be at most a ratio 𝑟𝐵𝐿
𝑚𝑎𝑥 of the market price of the ﬂat. Each month, the principal of the bridge 
loan is increased by the interest, based on the base rate (𝐼𝑅𝑏∕12). The bridge loan principal is to be repaid upon sale of the collateral.
Regarding regular housing loans and renovation loans, the monthly instalment for loan 𝑙 (𝑀𝐼𝑡,𝑙) is calculated as an annuity, 
which is aﬀected by the interest rate (𝐼𝑅𝑙) and the maturity (𝑝𝐷
𝑙 ) of the loan:
𝑀𝐼𝑡,𝑙 =𝐿𝑂𝐴𝑁𝑓 ×𝐼𝑅𝑙∕(1−(1+ 𝐼𝑅𝑙)−𝑝𝐷
𝑙 ) (A.47)
The maturity of a newly issued loan is automatically 𝑝𝑀𝐿 or 𝑝𝑅𝐿 periods for housing and renovation loans, respectively. The interest 
rate of a newly issued loan is the sum of the base rate and a spread. The spread is set according to a regression on ln𝑊ℎ and 𝐿𝑇𝑉 and 
three age categories. The coeﬃcients were estimated according to empirical data (see AppendixB.4). Finally, the spread is adjusted 
according to interest rate ﬁxation.
When issuing a new loan (or extending an existing one because of renovation), households need to meet the two regulatory re-
quirements (LTV and DSTI) and the bank’s own prescription regarding a minimum consumption level. Regarding the LTV regulation, 
the principal for ﬂat 𝑓 for household 𝑖 at the time of issuance (𝐿𝑂𝐴𝑁𝑓) may not exceed a fraction 𝐿𝑇𝑉 𝑚𝑎𝑥 of the ask price of the 
ﬂat.35 Compliance with the DSTI regulation is calculated by taking into account all monthly instalments:
𝑀𝐼𝑖
𝑡,𝑙𝑓
+
∑
𝑙
𝑀𝐼𝑡,𝑙,<𝐷𝑆𝑇𝐼 𝑖,𝑙𝑓 𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖,𝑙 ∈𝐿𝑡,𝑖 (A.48)
where 𝑀𝐼𝑖
𝑡,𝑙𝑓
is the monthly instalment provided that household 𝑖obtains the loan for ﬂat 𝑓 and 𝐷𝑆𝑇𝐼 𝑖,𝑙𝑓 depends on the length of 
interest rate ﬁxation and on 𝐼ℎ
𝑡,𝑖. The length of interest rate ﬁxation is generated according to the empirical distribution of the loan 
contracts in Hungary.36
The household pays the monthly instalments in the order of issuance. If a household cannot fully pay the monthly instalment 
of loan 𝑙, it pays as much as it can and the loan becomes nonperforming. By 𝑝𝑛𝑝
𝑡,𝑙 we denote the number of periods since loan 𝑙 is 
nonperforming. If 𝑝𝑛𝑝
𝑡,𝑙 exceeds a threshold 𝑝𝑛𝑝𝑟, the bank tries to restructure the loan, by increasing the duration at most to 𝑝𝑀𝐿
periods, until the debtor would meet the DSTI requirements. If the household becomes able to fully pay the restructured instalment, 
the loan contract becomes performing again. However, if this intervention does not work and 𝑝𝑛𝑝
𝑡,𝑙 exceeds 𝑝𝑛𝑝𝑙, the bank no longer 
tries to restructure the loan and the collateral will be liquidated.
If a loan contract reaches the stage of liquidation, the outstanding principal is accounted as a loss. If a loan is nonperforming, and 
the actual payment does not cover the interest payment, the outstanding principal will be increased by this missing interest payment. 
Until the collateral can be liquidated, the accumulation of interest payment continues, as well as the increase of the losses.
If the collateral can be liquidated, we adjust the bank losses by the income of the bank coming from this transaction. In this case, 
the debtor only receives a 𝑟𝑓𝑠 fraction of the transaction price of the ﬂat, and then it pays all of its obligations to the bank connected 
to the given loan.
35 In the case of renovation loans, we use the market price since the ask price is not available.
36 We extrapolated the observed trend of the share of long-term ﬁxation converging to 1.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
41
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
A.7. Rental market
Renters pay the ask rental price in the rental market, so the ask rental price and the market rental price can be used interchange-
ably. For ﬂat 𝑓 the ask (or market) rental price (𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓) is a fraction 𝑟𝑅𝑃 of the market price of the ﬂat adjusted by mark-up 𝜇𝑟
𝑡,𝑛, used 
throughout neighbourhood 𝑛of the bucket of ﬂat 𝑓:
𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓 =𝑟𝑅𝑃 ×𝑃𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓 ×(1+ 𝜇𝑟
𝑡,𝑛) (A.49)
𝜇𝑟
𝑡,𝑛 =𝑐𝜇
𝑟 (1− 𝑉𝑅𝑡−1,𝑖)𝛼𝜇
𝑟 (A.50)
where 𝑐𝜇
𝑟 and 𝛼𝜇
𝑟 are exogenous parameters, and 𝑉𝑅𝑡,𝑖 is the vacancy rate of the rental market in neighbourhood 𝑛in period 𝑡 −1, so 
the mark-up is a monotonically decreasing function of the vacancy rate.
If a household does not have an own home or a rental contract, but needs to live in a separate ﬂat, to select a ﬂat to rent, it looks 
through the vacant ﬂats in the rental market in its preferred region and selects the one with the highest surplus. The calculation of 
the rental reservation price (𝑅𝑅𝑃𝑡,𝑓,𝑖) happens using the household’s utility function as in (A.23), but to get the surplus, instead of 
the rental ask price we use 𝑅𝑚
𝑡,𝑓∕𝑟𝑅𝑃 in order to match the appropriate magnitude. Households come in random order, and rent out 
a ﬂat for 𝑝𝑟 periods.
Similarly to the ﬁctive ideal own ﬂat for households, we also deﬁne an ideal rental ﬂat for those households which are active in the 
rental market. We determine the ﬁctive rental demand for each bucket 𝑖(𝐹𝐷𝑅𝑏
𝑡,𝑖) based on this calculation, which is a contributing 
factor to investment decisions (see AppendixA.5.2).
The probability of taking a vacant ﬂat to the housing market in period 𝑡 in neighbourhood 𝑖 is 𝑝𝑟𝑅𝑆
𝑡,𝑖 (rent sale probability). The 
calculation of this consists of two components:
𝑝𝑟𝑅𝑆
𝑡,𝑖 =𝑝𝑟𝐸𝑅𝑆
𝑡,𝑖 ×𝑝𝑟𝑉𝑅
𝑡,𝑖 , (A.51)
where 𝑝𝑟𝐸𝑅𝑆
𝑡,𝑖 is a component which linearly depends on the expected return spread (with constant 𝑐𝑅𝑆
0 and coeﬃcient 𝑐𝑅𝑆
1 ). 𝑝𝑟𝑉𝑅
𝑡,𝑖 is 
an adjustment factor based on the vacancy rate in the given neighbourhood:
𝑝𝑟𝑉𝑅
𝑡,𝑖 = 1− 𝑇𝑉𝑅
1− 𝑉𝑅𝑡,𝑖
, (A.52)
where TVR is the target vacancy rate (see (A.42)).
A.8. Sample model – empirical model diﬀerences
The sample model has fewer features than the empirical model, and we had to implement the generation of initial individuals, 
households and ﬂats. In the sample model, there is only one region (and so ﬁrst-time buyers do not consider moving to another 
region). This region contains only four neighbourhoods which is enough to implement neighbourhood quality heterogeneity, but 
within a neighbourhood we have the same buckets regarding size and state. This implies that even a model with 20,000 to 30,000 
households can have enough transactions in a month to yield a properly functioning model (however, as discussed in 3.4, increasing 
the number of households leads to more accurate results). We tried to keep input generation (individuals, households and ﬂats) as 
simple as possible while minimizing the eﬀect of demographic changes and trying to make the housing stock more or less match 
the preferences of the initial population. Regarding individuals, the age distribution is even; every woman gets married and they 
marry at the same age and give birth to two children at the same age, and every individual passes away at the same age. We keep 
educational heterogeneity, but regarding income, the starting real wage distribution is normal.
In the beginning, we match a husband to every woman above marriage age with a proper number of children and then we calculate 
the lifetime income of households. We assign utility function parameters according to trimmed normal distributions regarding the 
six parameters. Given the lifetime income and the utility function parameters, we can assign a ﬂat to every household. To do so we 
generate ﬁctive ﬂats for every bucket in the model which are linearly priced. From these ﬂats, we assign the ﬂat with the highest 
surplus to a given household. The initial deposit of households is a speciﬁc fraction of their lifetime income.
In the sample model, we turn oﬀ the rental market, and thus every household is an owner occupier (if it has already managed 
to purchase a ﬂat). Since buy-to-let investors rent out ﬂats, this simpliﬁcation eliminates investment purchases as well. We keep the 
housing stock constant as well, and so the sample model does not contain renovation or a construction sector and newly built ﬂats. 
Finally, we keep GDP and the price level constant, so we disregard economic growth (however, these features can be activated in the 
code).
Using a lower degree of heterogeneity, we can investigate some basic mechanisms with a lower number of agents. This enables 
us to run the model in a longer time horizon, and to investigate the cyclical behaviour of the model. Accordingly, despite the many 
simpliﬁcations of the sample model, we also add one feature, which is an additional cyclical rule. According to the Expenditure 
Cascades Hypothesis (Levine et al. (2010)), when prices go up (down), households may decide to spend more (less) on housing, 
mimicking the formation of habits or because they try to live in ﬂats similar to those of their peer groups.
We implement this feature by generalizing the utility function by including a cyclical adjuster 𝐶𝐴𝑡 (which is set to 1 in the 
empirical model):
𝑅𝑃𝑓
𝑡,𝑖 =(𝐹𝐶𝑟𝑝
𝑡,𝑓,𝑖 +𝑁𝐸𝐼𝐺𝐻 𝑟𝑝
𝑓,𝑖)∗ 𝐿𝑇𝐼 ℎ
𝑡,𝑖 ∗𝑃𝑡 ∗𝐶𝐴𝑡 +𝑁𝐵𝑓
𝑡,𝑖 (A.53)

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
42
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
𝐶𝐴𝑡 =𝑐𝑐𝑎 ×
( 𝑃𝐼𝑡∕(𝑃𝑡𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡)
𝑃𝐼𝑏∕(𝑃𝑏𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑏)
)
, (A.54)
where 𝑐𝑐𝑎 is an exogenous parameter, and 𝑃𝐼𝑡 is the quarterly price index in period 𝑡. Accordingly, the cyclical adjuster captures the 
change in the price index to the nominal GDP or the change in the aﬀordability of house prices. We can construct the aggregate price 
index 𝑃𝐼𝑡 by calculating and aggregating the quarterly price indices of the neighbourhoods. We can calculate the quarterly price 
index for a given neighbourhood by regressing the price of the transactions of the 3 previous months and those of a base quarter 
using the following regression function:
log𝑃𝑅𝐼𝐶𝐸 =𝛽𝑃𝐼
0 +𝛽𝑃𝐼
1 log𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸 +𝛽𝑃𝐼
2 log𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸 2 +𝛽𝑃𝐼
3 𝑄𝑈𝐴𝑅𝑇𝐸𝑅, (A.55)
where 𝑄𝑈𝐴𝑅𝑇𝐸𝑅 is 1 for transactions of the last 3 previous months, and 0 for the base quarter. The quarterly price index (𝑃𝐼𝑞
𝑡,𝑖) for 
neighbourhood 𝑖is (𝑃𝐼𝑞
𝑡,𝑖 =exp(𝛽𝑃𝐼
3 )). To obtain the aggregate quarterly price index (𝑃𝐼𝑞
𝑡 ), we use the weighted average of the price 
indices of the neighbourhoods with the number of transactions as weights.
A.9. Parameters
Table A.1
Parameter values of the empirical model.
Parametername Notation Value
minimallengthofunemployment(inperiods,forthreeeducationalcategories) 𝑝𝑢𝑚
𝑐 3, 5, 6
thresholdforsizedeviationratioforclosestneighbourcalculation 𝑡ℎ𝑐𝑛𝑠 0.1
thresholdforstatedeviationratioforclosestneighbourcalculation 𝑡ℎ𝑐𝑛𝑞 0.1
weightofsizedeviationratio 𝑤𝑑𝑠 0.5
weightofstatedeviationratio 𝑤𝑑𝑞 0.5
monthlypricedecrease 𝑐𝑚𝑝𝑑 0.015
discountfactorforforcedliquidation 𝐷𝐶 0.8
augmentationtermtothediscountfactorforforcedliquidation 𝐷𝐶𝑎 0.5
shockthresholdfortheactivationoftheaugmentationterm 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑑𝑐 0.95
maximumstateofﬂatforlandpricecalculation 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝐿𝑃 2.07
baseconstructionunitcost 𝐶𝑈𝐶 𝑏 150,000
baseconstructionunitcostmark-upforBudapest,Pestcounty 𝜃𝐶𝑈𝐶 0.5, 0.2
averagewagecoeﬃcientforconstructionunitcost 𝑐𝐶𝑈𝐶 0.5
constantofconstructionmark-up 𝜇𝐶,0 -0.1
soldratiocoeﬃcientofconstructionmark-up 𝜇𝐶,1 0.5
monthlypriceconvergenceofnewlybuiltﬂats 𝛾 0.15
numberofperiodsaftercompletiontostartpriceconverge 𝑝𝑛𝑏𝑎 4
numberofﬁctiveﬂatsinabucket 𝑛𝑓 5
monthlydepreciationrateofthestateofﬂats 𝛿 0.004
monthlyprobabilityofhomerenovation 𝑝𝑟𝑟 0.02
baserenovationunitcost 𝑅𝑈𝐶𝑏 100,000
baserenovationunitcostmark-upforBudapest,Pestcounty 𝜃𝑅𝑈𝐶 0.5, 0.2
averagewagecoeﬃcientforrenovationunitcost 𝑐𝑅𝑈𝐶
1 0.5
renovationvolumecoeﬃcientforrenovationunitcost 𝑐𝑅𝑈𝐶
2 1.0
maximumlifespaninmonths 𝑎𝑚𝑎𝑥 1080
beginningofworkingageinperiods,byeducationallevel 𝑎𝑤 [260; 240; 216]
retirementageinperiods,byeducationallevel 𝑎𝑝 [780; 780; 780]
pensionreplacementrate,byeducationallevel 𝑝𝑟𝑟 [0.85; 0.85; 0.85]
numberofperiodstolookaheadtocalculatelifetimeincome 𝑝𝐿𝑇𝐼 240
depositinheritanceratio 𝑟𝑑𝑖 0.3
constantoftargetsavingsrate 𝑐𝑡𝑠𝑟
0 -4.5113
wagecoeﬃcientoftargetsavingsrate 𝑐𝑡𝑠𝑟 0.3125
minimumconsumptionrate 𝑟𝑚𝑐 0.5
numberofperiodstoreachsubsistenceconsumption 𝑝𝑚𝑐 48
ageinperiodstocountasadultinsubsistencepercapitaconsumption 𝑎𝑎𝑠𝑝𝑐 164
weightofadditionaladultsinsubsistencepercapitaconsumption 𝑤𝑎𝑠𝑝𝑐 0.75

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
43
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Table A.1 (continued)
Parametername Notation Value
weightofchildreninsubsistencepercapitaconsumption 𝑤𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐 0.5
lowerpercapitasubsistencelevel 𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙 60,000
thresholdforlowerpercapitasubsistencelevel 𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑙 100,000
upperpercapitasubsistencelevel 𝑐𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢 90,450
thresholdforupperpercapitasubsistencelevel 𝑡ℎ𝑠𝑝𝑐𝑢 160,000
constantinadditionalutilitygainofnewlybuiltﬂats 𝑐𝑛𝑏𝑎0 0.4
neighbourhoodqualitycoeﬃcientinadditionalutilitygainofnewlybuiltﬂats 𝑐𝑛𝑏𝑎1 0.06
ratioofhouseholdswhichcanconsiderrenovationwhenmakingbids 𝑟𝑟 0.5
renovationinterval 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑟 0.1
renovationcap 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 2.71
additionalnon-materialrenovationcostratio 𝜈 0.1
shareofﬁrst-timebuyersevaluatingasecondregion(Budapest/otherregions) 𝑝𝑓𝑏 [0.25; 0.5]
probabilityofconsideringmovingatageofmandatorymovingdecision 𝑝𝑟𝑚
𝑓 0.7
ageinperiodsofmandatorymovingdecision 𝑎𝑚
𝑓 540
probabilityofconsideringmovingforyounghouseholds 𝑝𝑟𝑚
0 0.006
thresholdageinperiodsforlowerprobabilityofconsideringmoving 𝑎𝑚
0 540
movingprobabilitydecayparameter 𝑀𝑃𝐷 0.95
thresholddeviationrateformoving 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑚 0.4
numberofperiodsforthecalculationofaveragenewlybuiltdemand 𝑝𝑁𝑃𝐷 12
targetbuﬀerrateofnewlybuiltﬂats 𝑇𝑁𝐵𝐵 0.2
durationofconstructioninperiods 𝑝𝐶 18
capofnewconstructiontodemand 𝑟𝑁𝐵
𝑚𝑎𝑥 2
landareaneedratio 𝑟𝐿𝐴 0.2
constantinplannedprofessionalinvestmentvalue 𝑐𝑃𝐼𝑅
0 0.0
coeﬃcientofexpectedreturnspreadinplannedprofessionalinvestmentvalue 𝑐𝑃𝐼𝑅
1 0.14
capofprofessionalinvestmentvalueratio 𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑃𝐼𝑀𝑉 0.01
capofhouseholdinvestmentprobabilityinneighbourhood 𝑝𝑟𝑖
𝑚𝑎𝑥 0.1
coeﬃcientofexpectedreturnspreadforhouseholdinvestmentprobabilityinneighbourhood 𝑐𝑖 10
powerofexpectedreturnspreadforhouseholdinvestmentprobabilityinneighbourhood 𝛼𝑖 2
targetvacancyrate 𝑇𝑉𝑅 0.05
numberofbiddingroundsinthehousingmarket 𝑛𝑟 10
numberofﬂatstoevaluate 𝑛𝐸 400
coeﬃcientinadjustmentregardingsurplusdiﬀerence 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑎 0.05
powerinadjustmentregardingsurplusdiﬀerence 𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑎 1.25
maximumadjustmentasaproportionofsurplusdiﬀerence 𝑅𝑃𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑥 0.75
adjustercoeﬃcientinprobabilityofplacingbid 𝑐𝑃𝑃𝐵 1
maximumnumberofbidsplacedperhousehold 𝑛𝐵 10
weightofadjustedreservationpriceinbid 𝑤𝑅𝑃𝐴 0.05
thresholdmarketpriceforbridgeloan 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝐵𝐿 5,000,000
maximumbridgeloantovalue 𝑟𝐵𝐿
𝑚𝑎𝑥 0.75
durationofhousingloans 𝑝𝑀𝐿 300
durationofrenovationloans 𝑝𝑅𝐿 60
loan-to-valuecap 𝐿𝑇𝑉 𝑚𝑎𝑥 0.8
numberofnonperformingperiodstorestructureloancontract 𝑝𝑛𝑝𝑟 3
numberofnonperformingperiodstoliquidatecollateral 𝑝𝑛𝑝𝑟 6
incomeratioofforcedsale 𝑟𝑓𝑠 0.25
renttoprice 𝑟𝑅𝑃 0.004
coeﬃcientofutilizationratioinrentalmark-up 𝑐𝜇
𝑟 0.3
powerofutilizationratioinrentalmark-up 𝛼𝜇
𝑟 3
lengthofrentalcontractsinperiods 𝑝𝑟 12
constantininvestmentsaleprobability 𝑐𝑅𝑆
0 0.0208
coeﬃcientininvestmentsaleprobability 𝑐𝑅𝑆
1 -0.5208

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
44
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Appendix B. Data generation
B.1. Generating the housing stock
Representativeness of the housing stock
The housing stock of Hungary in the model was generated with the motivation of approximating reality as closely as possible. 
We attempted to achieve this by using several data sources, most importantly a realtor dataset consisting of 172,000 to 214,000 
transactions depending on the year between 2016 and 2020. These records were multiplied in a way to match not only the size 
of the actual housing stock but also to mimic the empirical distributions of the ﬂat characteristics which are the most relevant 
for our model (although these distributions are based on micro-census data, the Hungarian Central Statistical Oﬃce publishes only 
the aggregated statistics and not the granular data). To accomplish our objective, the observed ﬂats were scaled up following an 
elaborated weighting strategy. As a ﬁrst step, we assessed the diﬀerences between the micro-census statistics and the realtor dataset 
based on the distributions of the variables observed in both cases, and we selected those with the highest deviations. Ideally, one 
could use all of the variables in the data to reweight the observations, but this would result in countless categories with a very small 
number of observations in each. In the end, we applied iterative proportional ﬁtting, i.e. raking procedure, based on the region, the 
settlement type, the size and the price of the ﬂats.37
State and neighbourhood characteristics
Besides the above mentioned traits, we also assigned state and neighbourhood characteristics (representing the quality of the 
ﬂats and their environment) for all the generated ﬂats. To represent each of these with one continuous variable respectively, we 
had to reduce the high-dimensional space of various characteristics of the ﬂats. In the case of the state, we compressed the year of 
construction, the type of the building, the type of the heating system and the condition of the ﬂat characteristics into one categorical 
variable, and we divided the ﬂats into 21 categories. Regarding the locationof ﬂats, we divided the country into actual, interpretable 
neighbourhoods based on postal codes, the administrative category of the settlements, whether they are in the agglomeration of a 
larger town, whether they are a tourist destination, the distance from the capital of the county and the distance from Budapest.38
We created 124 neighbourhoods, of which 40 can be found in the capital and 84 cover the rest of the country. The main principle in 
this process was to divide the country as homogeneously as possible from the point of view of pricing, while keeping the number of 
observations suﬃciently high everywhere to be able to calculate neighbourhood-level price indices.
To obtain continuous values, we ﬁrst estimated a quality measure for both of these categorical variables by running a logarithmic 
regression on the price of the ﬂats:
𝑙𝑛(𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒)𝑖 =𝛽0 +𝛽1 ×𝑙𝑛(𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖)+ 𝛽2 ×𝑙𝑛(𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒2
𝑖 )+ 𝛽3 ×𝑙𝑛(𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖)+ 𝛽4 ×𝑙𝑛(𝑛ℎ𝑖)+ 𝜖 (B.1)
As a second step, we estimated another variant of this regression using the continuous version of the variables (we obtained these 
continuous values using the coeﬃcients estimated for each of the categories in the ﬁrst stage):
𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖 =𝛽0 +𝛽1 ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 ×𝑛ℎ𝑖 +𝛽2 ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒2
𝑖 ×𝑛ℎ𝑖 +𝛽3 ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 ×𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖 ×𝑛ℎ𝑖 +𝛽4 ×𝑛ℎ𝑖 +𝜖 (B.2)
To enhance the data quality, we restored the missing location information for 2,000 cases based on the neighbourhood of the ﬂats. 
Furthermore, based on the results of the regression, we could impute the missing state observations as well. As further corrections, 
we modiﬁed the prices using the housing market price indices we calculated.
To make the results more stable we conducted the following outlier ﬁltering steps: (i) We omitted the observations with the 
top 5% error expressed both nominally and in relative terms (9% of the observations altogether) and reran the estimation on the 
remaining sample; (ii) we also omitted the observations where the state values were smaller than 0 or larger than 3.25.
Representativeness of the transactions
To ensure that the transactions on the housing market in the model occur in a realistic way, we assessed the time of the deal, the 
price, the size, the state and the neighbourhood of the ﬂats in the transactions based on the empirical observations in a dataset from 
the National Tax Authority between 2016 and 2017. As we cannot observe the stateinformation for these observations, we calculated 
this based on the distribution in the 2017 realtor dataset.
We also ensured the representativeness regarding the age of the parties in the transactions. For this, we were able to observe the 
year of birth information between 2016 and 2018 in around 80% of the observations, i.e. for 411,000 transactions. Additionally, we 
observed the age distributions of the inheritance events and the amount of savings.
37 Since the size distribution is very diﬀerent between the countryside and urban areas, we applied diﬀerent size categorization depending on the settlement type.
38 We had to perform several data cleaning steps in this process. Most importantly, the agglomerations of some towns were mixed up and had to be disentangled 
based on postal codes; for some locations we could observe only the name of the settlements, but not their postal codes; the tourist areas in the Danube Bend and at 
Lake Velence were too broadly deﬁned, and so we narrowed these to contain only the areas directly connected to the water.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
45
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Disaggregated house price indices
Our granular setup made it possible to calculate not only aggregated, but also county and even neighbourhood and settlement 
type level housing price indices. We produced monthly and quarterly indices between 2014 and 2018 for three settlement types in 
the 19 counties (villages, small towns and regional centres); and 22 indices for the districts of Budapest.39 Furthermore, we also 
calculated the price indices at the level of neighbourhoods.
The data used in these estimations comes from the National Tax Authority. The methodology of the calculation is a full time 
horizon, hedonic regression with time dummies to ensure the suﬃcient number of observations even at disaggregated levels. We 
applied a two-stage outlier detection: (i) in the ﬁrst phase we determined absolute lower and upper bounds for the size, the CPI-
adjusted transaction price and the adjusted price per square meter ratio; (ii) while in the second step we applied 4 statistical extreme 
value ﬁltering techniques based on the predicted values of the regression.
Representativeness of rented ﬂats
We determine in the model which households live in rented ﬂats based on empirical observations from the above described 
realtor dataset. To see the ratio of households living in rented ﬂats at a disaggregated level, we use the distribution of the following 
household and ﬂat characteristics: region, settlement type, ﬂat size category, price category and the income decile of the households. 
We decide whether a ﬂat will be rented or owned by going over them in multiple rounds until we approximate the empirical 
distributions suﬃciently. During this procedure we introduce a few restrictions: (i) only young households live in rented ﬂats; (ii) 
and households with housing loans do not rent.
We also consider short-term renting activities to take into account the eﬀects of Airbnb-type business activities. We determine 
this external demand expressed in the number of ﬂats in each neighbourhood and in each size and state category based on Boros et 
al. (2018), Dudás et al. (2018)and  Jancsik et al. (2018).
B.2. Generating individuals
Similarly to the housing stock, the objective of the individual generating process is to match the size and the empirical dis-
tributions of the Hungarian population. To complete this endeavour, our starting point was to use the database of the Central 
Administration of National Pension Insurance (CANPI) containing information on individuals’ age, sex, place of residence (at NUTS 
1-3 and LAU 1 level) and starting wage. As the CANPI system only stores information on the part of the population which is active on 
the labour market (or receive social beneﬁts in relation to children), we compared its aggregated numbers to the annual demographic 
statistics from the Hungarian Central Statistical Oﬃce (HCSO). In doing so, we could make corrections to match the empirical data 
on the population pyramid in Hungary and we could also match the demographics of each of the counties in Hungary.
Additionally, we had to make some adjustments to account for the fact that young adults tend to start working earlier in the more 
underdeveloped regions of the country, and thus their regional distribution is imbalanced in the CANPI statistics. To correct for this, 
we reweighted the young population based on the data of more representative age cohorts.
Although we also observe the occupational classiﬁcation (ISCO-88) of the workers in the CANPI data, the number of employees 
working in each category changes across cohorts. To stabilize this, we ﬁx the proportions of the occupational classes based on the 
34-year-old cohort (in the case of the 2018 CANPI observations), as we assume that people usually reach their ﬁnal occupation at 
this age.
Finally, we had to determine the age-dependent mortality rates of the individuals, for which we used the 2018 Demographic 
Yearbook of the HCSO.
B.3. Generating households
Additionally to the marital information of the CANPI, we can also identify couples empirically using the Central Credit Register 
(CCR) of Hungary based on the co-debtors in the loan contracts. If the two debtors of a housing loan contract belong to the opposite 
sex, they live in the same area and their age diﬀerence is at most 10 years we consider them a couple.
However, for the portion of the population where we cannot directly observe the relationships, we must match individuals using 
diﬀerent strategies. Firstly, we assign a husband to all women who are having children. We do this by assessing the attributes 
(location of the place of residence, salary, occupation, and age diﬀerence) of the members of married couples. We create new couples 
by adhering to the empirical observations in accordance with these characteristics. As a next step, we turn to the individuals who do 
not have children and are younger than 30 years.40 In these cases, we assign these individuals to parent households (located in the 
same county), which are selected such that we follow the empirical distribution of the number of children per household. Thirdly, we 
also create couples without children following similar principles as before but in an ordered way based on the individuals’ age. (This 
way we ensure that the probability of being a single-individual household is higher for older people.) In this step, we also utilized the 
empirically observed probabilities of women becoming married, which we calculated based on the diﬀerences of the ratio of married 
women between consecutive cohorts. Finally, we make sure that there is the same number of households as the number of ﬂats in 
each county.41
39 Due to the low number of observations, we handled district 22 and 23 together.
40 In the model, we assume that individuals live with their parents until they have children, or until they become 30 years old.
41 To ensure this, we erase single-individual households where we could not observe the occupational classiﬁcation.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
46
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Besides marital information, the CANPI data also contains records on several social welfare beneﬁts, most notably the baby-care 
allowance (CSED), childcare allowance (GYES) and child-care beneﬁt (GYED), based on which one can identify birth events. If the 
length of these social transfers exceeds the time interval available after the birth of a child, we assume the birth of a second child as 
well, and thus we can also consider the birth order of the children (however, we disregard the birth of twins or disabled children for 
whom the length of the social beneﬁts is extended).
B.4. Cleaning and imputation of the loan contract data
Although we can observe the loan contracts in the CCR data, some important information is missing and there are also several 
data errors which we had to handle based on the observed variables. Regarding the cleaning of the data, we made many corrections, 
e.g. in the case of maturity we observed some negative numbers; we corrected unrealistic instalment and outstanding principal 
numbers using annuity calculation; sometimes there were also inconsistencies between the loan-to-value (LTV) numbers and the loan 
characteristics or between the instalments and the incomes of the debtors.
However, most importantly, we had to calculate the interest rates of the loans as this information is not part of the CCR dataset. 
We did this in two distinct ways, ﬁrstly by using the amount of the outstanding principal, and secondly by using the original loan 
amount in an annuity formula. Since we know only the year but not the exact date of signing the loan contract (we assume it to be 
in June in every case) the ﬁrst version yields more accurate results, but the number of observations is signiﬁcantly higher in the case 
of the original loan amount. If we could obtain both results, we took the minimum of the two (but in the end we only kept the values 
if they are below 20%).
As an alternative approach, we also performed a regression analysis, for which we used not only the CCR data, but also information 
on the income of the debtors from income tax data and additional information on the loan contracts based on the Hungarian central 
bank’s L11 data reports. The predicted values of this regression can also be used to impute the missing observations, but also we 
need them to be able to determine the interest rate of newly issued loans in the model.
The regression was estimated by using data only on housing loans in 2017. Firstly, we had to identify individuals belonging 
to the same household (for which we used the income dataset), and collapse the data to the household level. Furthermore, we 
ﬁltered the extreme values in the case of the loan amount, the interest rate, the market value of the ﬂat, the income, the age and 
the LTV variables. In the end, we only kept observations where the debtors’ ages were between 18 and 50; their income exceeded 
the minimum wage, but remained below monthly HUF 3 million (EUR 9,000); the interest rate of the loan is ﬁxed at least for 10 
years; and the interest rate is between 2-8%. For the sake of eﬃcient applicability in the model, we opted for a simple speciﬁcation 
consisting of only three explanatory variables: LTV, the logarithm of the net income of the household, and the age of the debtors.
B.5. Generating utility function parameters
To determine the parameters of the function representing households’ preferences in choosing ﬂats, we utilized the fact that 
we can observe many households which are present simultaneously in the CANPI, in the CCR and in the realtor dataset as well. 
This way we can see these households’ income, the educational level and age of the debtors, and also the ﬂats belonging to these 
households. There are around 9,500 households which are observable in all three aforementioned datasets. However, after cleaning 
these observations, we were able to use around 8,500 households (for example, we removed the observations where the lifetime 
income did not exceed the price of the purchased ﬂat by at least 30%. In these cases, at least one of the debtors in the household had 
zero wages, and the remaining income could not cover consumption expenses suﬃciently).
Based on these pieces of information, we were able to calibrate each of these households’ reservation price function by ﬁnding 
the parameter set for each household, with which the assumed function gives the highest consumer surplus for exactly the ﬂat that 
they own in reality (or for one which is very similar to it). By assigning unique parameters to every household, they can compare 
ﬂats in the model realistically, and make optimal decisions for themselves.
The exact reservation price functions of the households depend on their lifetime income (𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ) and the characteristics of the given 
ﬂat 𝑓 in the following way:
𝑅𝑃ℎ,𝑓 =
(
𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑠
ℎ ×𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑠
ℎ
𝑓 ×(1+ 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑞
ℎ ×𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑞
ℎ
𝑓 )+
𝜎1,ℎ
(1+exp(− 𝑄𝑁𝑓 ))1∕𝜎2,ℎ
)
×𝐼𝑙𝑡
ℎ (B.3)
where the parameters to calibrate are 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑠
ℎ , 𝑐𝑟𝑝𝑞
ℎ , 𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑠
ℎ , 𝛼𝑟𝑝𝑞
ℎ , 𝜎1,ℎ, 𝜎2,ℎ.
We can thus calculate the maximum amount of money a given household is willing to pay for a ﬂat. By subtracting the actual 
price of this ﬂat, one obtains the consumer surplus, which the households aim to maximize during the calibration process.
To perform this calculation, we ﬁrst determined the expected lifetime income of the households. This depends on the starting 
wage and the educational level of the members in a given household. We assumed that households do not want to spend on house 
purchases out of their pension income (not even in the form of instalments). Consequently, we only took into account the incomes 
which are due until an individual reaches the retirement age (65 years). Furthermore, we also assume that households can take out 
loans, and the amount available from this source corresponds to the sum of the household members’ income for the next 20 years 
(or for the years until the retirement age, if it is less than 20 years). Hence, households can aﬀord more and more expensive ﬂats as 
their members grow older, and the whole amount of their lifetime income becomes available at the age of 45 due to the option of 
taking out a loan.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
47
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
We imposed some additional restrictions regarding the potentially available ﬂats in the calibration process for a given household 
based on three criteria: (i) year of the purchase, (ii) price, and (iii) location:
•W e only considered ﬂats which were sold in the same time period as the observed purchase of a given household. In this way, 
we were able to recreate supply-side market conditions to some extent.
•T h e price range of the ﬂats among which households could choose during the calibration depends on their condition. If the 
actually purchased ﬂat of the household has low state value, the price deviation cannot be more than 10% downwards and 30% 
upwards. In the case of ﬂats with average state value, both of these thresholds are 20%, while for ﬂats in excellent condition 
the price deviation can be at most 30% downwards and 10% upwards. In this way, the reservation price function also contains 
information on the preferences between a cheaper ﬂat which requires renovation or a more expensive ﬂat which is in better 
condition.
•I f the empirically observed purchase occurred in the capital, by default we considered ﬂats in the same district, otherwise we 
considered ﬂats in the same county. To account for the possibility of migration within the country, we extended the available 
ﬂat list by adding 500 randomly sampled ﬂats from the capital (within the parameters of the ﬁrst two constraints above). This 
represents the typical moving pattern in Hungary from rural areas to the capital.
During the calibration process, households choose the ﬂat with the highest consumer surplus from this list. As we want to ﬁnd 
the parameters which capture the observed behaviour of the households, we need to evaluate how close the characteristics of the ﬂat 
chosen during the calibration are to the empirically observed ﬂat of a given household. We calculate the maximum of the percentage 
diﬀerences between the two ﬂats’ price, size, state value and neighbourhood quality score, and we minimize the value of this function 
during the parameter search. We consider the calibration successful if the value of the objective function is less than 20% (a zero 
value implies that the household picked the same ﬂat after the optimization as it did in reality).
To perform this task, we used a stochastic optimization tool called simulated annealing, which is an adaptation of the Metropolis–
Hastings algorithm. It is well suited to ﬁnd the global maximum of non-linear, non-diﬀerentiable, multimodal functions such as the 
one in our optimization problem. When choosing the hyperparameters of this process, we usually used the default values of the 
optimizationpackage in R. The lower and upper limits of the parameters were set to enable for extreme preferences.
In the end, the calibration was successful for 3,775 households (i.e. the success rate was 44.6%), among which we had perfect 
matching in 454 cases.
B.6. Merging the diﬀerent data sources
After generating all of the agents and other objects, we had to create connections among them. Most importantly, we connected 
the households to ﬂats, loan contracts, and utility function parameters. We observed some of these connections in the empirical 
datasets, but we had to generate the rest of the links following the procedure described below.
There were many loan contracts in the CCR data for which there was no CANPI id, i.e. we could not identify the household 
in relation to the given mortgage contract. To establish these links, we divided the unmatched loan contracts and households into 
categories which can correspond to each other. Households were categorized based on the age and income quartiles they belong to 
and the county42 they live in. Loans were divided based on the year of concluding the contract, the quartile of the amount of the loan 
and the county of the debtors. Finally, we randomly matched the elements of the corresponding categories (for example, a mortgage 
contract with a high loan amount which was concluded recently with a client from Fejér county was assigned to a wealthy household 
with young adult members in Fejér county).
After matching the housing loans to households, we had to add the ﬂats and the corresponding reservation price function param-
eters to these households as well. First, we do this for those cases where we observe the value of the ﬂats. Both the housing loan 
contract data and the housing market transaction dataset contain information on the county and the type of the settlement where the 
ﬂats are located. Furthermore, for these cases we were able to create quartile categories in both datasets regarding the value of the 
ﬂats (we observe the transaction value in the transaction dataset, and the market value in the housing loan dataset). This would be 
enough to form categories (using these three variables) and perform a random assignment between ﬂats and households. However, 
in order to also match the unique parameters of the households which govern their reservation price formation, we had to calculate 
households’ lifetime income (consumption is calculated simply as the diﬀerence between the lifetime income and the value of their 
ﬂat).
In the next step, we assigned ﬂats and parameters to those households which still had loan contracts, but there was no information 
on the value of their ﬂats. In these cases, we tried to ﬁnd the most suitable matching by choosing the best option for the household 
among 100 randomly chosen ﬂats and 5 randomly chosen parameter sets. Although this is a crude approach, we had to match almost 
700,000 households this way, which made it infeasible to apply more sophisticated solutions.
Finally, we dealt with the households which were not present in the CCR data. Here we only used the county and the income 
quartile versus ﬂat price quartile information to form categories for the random assignment process. If there were not enough ﬂats 
in a county, we relaxed this constraint and allowed to pick ﬂats anywhere in the region. If even this was too restrictive, we only kept 
the income and price quartile requirement, and eventually we even had to make some completely random matching.
42 Although Budapest is not classiﬁed as part of any county, in this context we divided it into three pseudo-county parts: city centre, outer urban areas and suburbs.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
48
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Appendix C. Sensitivity analysis
C.1. Robustness analysis
Fig. C.1. Results of the Welch’s test statistics for 40 realizations of the main output variables of the model between two parameter sets: original values and 10% 
perturbed values.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
49
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.2. Results of the Welch’s test statistics for 40 realizations of the main output variables of the model between two parameter sets: original values and 20% 
perturbed values.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
50
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.3. Results of the median test statistics for 40 realizations of the main output variables of the model across three parameter sets: original values, 10% perturbed 
values and 20% perturbed values.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
51
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
C.2. Sensitivity analysis
Fig. C.4. Numberofsigniﬁcantregressionestimationresultsfortheconsidere dparameters(thetypeoftheselectedparametersiscolour-coded).

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
52
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.5. Rangeofparametervaluesforthesensitivityanalysis.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
53
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.6. Box plots of 40 realizations for the average prices in diﬀerent regions with respect to three parameter sets: original values, 10% perturbation, 20% 
perturbation.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
54
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.7. Box plots of 40 realizations for the average number of quarterly transactions in diﬀerent regions with respect to three parameter sets: original values, 10% 
perturbation, 20% perturbation.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
55
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.8. Boxplotsof40realizationsfortheshareofLTVcategorieswithrespecttothreeparametersets:originalvalues,10%perturbation,20%perturbatio n.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
56
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.9. Boxplotsof40realizationsfortheshareofDSTIcategorieswithrespectto threeparametersets:originalvalues,10%perturbation,20%perturbati on.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
57
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Fig. C.10. Boxplotsof40realizationsfortheshareofincomedecileswithrespecttoth reeparametersets:originalvalues,10%perturbation,20%perturbatio n.
References
Acharya, V.V., Richardson, M., 2009. Causes of the ﬁnancial crisis. Crit. Rev.21  (2–3), 195–210.
Aikman, D., Haldane, A.G., Nelson, B.D., 2015. Curbing the credit cycle. Econ. J.125  (585), 1072–1109. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /ecoj .12113.
Axtell, R., Farmer, D., Geanakoplos, J., Howitt, P., Carrella, E., Conlee, B., et al., 2014. An agent-based model of the housing market bubble in metropolitan Washington, 
DC. In: Deutsche Bundesbank’s Spring Conference on “Housing Markets and the Macroeconomy: Challenges for Monetary Policy and Financial Stability”, pp.5–6.
Baptista, R., Farmer, J.D., Hinterschweiger, M., Low, K., Tang, D., Uluc, A., 2016. Macroprudential policy in an agent-based model of the UK housing market. Bank of 
England Staﬀ Working Paper (619).
Benedetti, M., Catapano, G., Sclavis, F.D., Favorito, M., Glielmo, A., Magnanimi, D., Muci, A., 2022. Black-it: a ready-to-use and easy-to-extend calibration kit for 
agent-based models. J. Open Sour. Softw.7  (79), 4622. https://doi .org /10 .21105 /joss .04622.
Borgonovo, E., Pangallo, M., Rivkin, J., Rizzo, L., Siggelkow, N., 2022. Sensitivity analysis of agent-based models: a new protocol. Comput. Math. Organ. Theory28  
(1), 52–94. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s10588 -021 -09358 -5.
Borio, C., 2014. The ﬁnancial cycle and macroeconomics: what have we learnt? J. Bank. Finance45,  182–198. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jbankﬁn .2013 .07 .031.
Boros, L., Dudás, G., Kovalcsik, T., Papp, S., Vida, G., 2018. Airbnb in Budapest: analysing spatial patterns and room of hotels and peer-to-peer accommodations. 
GeoJourn. Tour. Geosit.10  (1), 26–38.
Borri, N., Reichlin, P., 2018. The housing cost disease. J. Econ. Dyn. Control87,  106–123. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jedc .2017 .12 .001.
Brueckner, J.K., 1987. The structure of urban equilibria: a uniﬁed treatment of the Muth-Mills model. In: Mills, E.S. (Ed.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 
vol. 2. Elsevier, pp.821–845.
Cardaci, A., 2018. Inequality, household debt and ﬁnancial instability: an agent-based perspective. J. Econ. Behav. Organ.149,  434–458. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .
jebo .2018 .01 .010.
Carro, A., Hinterschweiger, M., Uluc, A., Farmer, J.D., 2023. Heterogeneous eﬀects and spillovers of macroprudential policy in an agent-based model of the UK 
housing market. Ind. Corp. Change32  (2), 386–432. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /icc /dtac030.
Carstensen, C.L., 2015. An agent-based model of the housing market. Steps toward a computational tool for policy analysis. University of Copenhagen. MSc thesis.
Catapano, G., Franceschi, F., Loberto, M., Michelangeli, V., 2021. Macroprudential policy analysis via an agent based model of the real estate sector. Bank of Italy 
Temi Di Discussione (Working Paper) No. 1338. https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3891583.
Ceron, J.A., Suarez, J., 2006. Hot and Cold Housing Markets: International Evidence. Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Cokayne, G., 2019. The eﬀects of macroprudential policies on house price cycles in an agent-based model of the Danish housing market. Tech. Rep., Danmarks 
Nationalbank Working Papers.
Cunningham, R., Kolet, I., 2011. Housing market cycles and duration dependence in the United States and Canada. Appl. Econ. 43 (5), 569–586. https://doi .org /10 .
1080 /00036840802584927.
Deissenberg, C., Van Der Hoog, S., Dawid, H., 2008. Eurace: a massively parallel agent-based model of the European economy. Appl. Math. Comput.204  (2), 541–552. 
https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .amc .2008 .05 .116.
De Stefani, A., 2021. House price history, biased expectations, and credit cycles: the role of housing investors. Real Estate Econ.49,  1238–1266. https://doi .org /10 .
1111 /1540 -6229 .12328.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
58
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Devisch, O.T., Timmermans, H.J., Arentze, T.A., Borger, A.W., 2009. An agent-based model of residential choice dynamics in nonstationary housing markets. Environ. 
Plan. A41  (8), 1997–2013. https://doi .org /10 .1068 /a41158.
Drehmann, M., Borio, C.E., Tsatsaronis, K., 2012. Characterising the ﬁnancial cycle: don’t lose sight of the medium term! BIS Working Papers, No. 380.
Dudás, G., Kovalcsik, T., Boros, L., Kovalcsik, B., Vida, G., 2018. Az airbnb szálláskínálatának jellemz˝oi a megyei jogú városokban. Terül/ Stat. 58 (5), 462–488. 
https://doi .org /10 .15196 /TS580502.
Erlingsson, E.J., Teglio, A., Cincotti, S., Stefansson, H., Sturlusson, J.T., Raberto, M., 2014. Housing market bubbles and business cycles in an agent-based credit 
economy. Econ.: Open-Access Open-Assess. E-J.8  (2014–8), 1–42. https://doi .org /10 .5018 /economics -ejournal .ja .2014 -8.
Evans, B.P., Glavatskiy, K., Harré, M.S., Prokopenko, M., 2021. The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: market forecasting with a spatial agent-based 
model. J. Econ. Interact. Coord., 1–53. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s11403 -021 -00324 -7.
Fagiolo, G., Guerini, M., Lamperti, F., Moneta, A., Roventini, A., 2019. Validation of agent-based models in economics and ﬁnance. In: Beisbart, C., Saam, N.J. (Eds.), 
Computer Simulation Validation. Simulation Foundations, Methods and Applications. Springer, pp.763–787.
Fatouh, M., Markose, S., Giansante, S., 2019. The impact of quantitative easing on UK bank lending: why banks do not lend to businesses? J. Econ. Behav. Organ.183,  
928–953. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jebo .2019 .02 .023.
Funke, M., Paetz, M., 2012. A DSGE-based assessment of nonlinear loan-to-value policies: evidence from Hong Kong. BOFIT Discussion Paper (11). https://doi .org /
10 .2139 /ssrn .2049783.
Garriga, C., Hedlund, A., 2020. Mortgage debt, consumption, and illiquid housing markets in the Great Recession. Am. Econ. Rev. 110 (6), 1603–1634. https://
doi .org /10 .1257 /aer .20170772.
Ge, J., 2014. Who creates housing bubbles? An agent-based study. In: Alam, S.J., Parunak, H.V.D. (Eds.), Multi-Agent-Based Simulation XIV. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
pp.143–150.
Ge, J., 2017. Endogenous rise and collapse of housing price: an agent-based model of the housing market. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 62, 182–198. https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .compenvurbsys .2016 .11 .005.
Ge, X., Li, X.-L., Li, Y., Liu, Y., 2022. The driving forces of China’s business cycles: evidence from an estimated DSGE model with housing and banking. China Econ. 
Rev.72,  101753. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .chieco .2022 .101753.
Ge, X., Li, X.-L., Zheng, L., 2020. The transmission of ﬁnancial shocks in an estimated DSGE model with housing and banking. Econ. Model. 89, 215–231. https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .econmod .2019 .09 .056.
Gelain, P., Bank, N., 2011. Macro-prudential policies in a DSGE model with ﬁnancial frictions. In: 7th Dynare Conference. Atlanta, USA.
Gelain, P., Lansing, K.J., Mendicino, C., 2013. House prices, credit growth, and excess volatility: implications for monetary and macroprudential policy. Int. J. Cent. 
Bank.9,  219–276.
Gilbert, N., Hawksworth, J.C., Swinney, P.A., 2009. An agent-based model of the English housing market. In: AAAI Spring Symposium: Technosocial Predictive 
Analytics, pp.30–35.
Glavatskiy, K.S., Prokopenko, M., Carro, A., Ormerod, P., Harré, M., 2021. Explaining herding and volatility in the cyclical price dynamics of urban housing markets 
using a large-scale agent-based model. SN Bus. Econ.1  (6), 1–21. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s43546 -021 -00077 -2.
Goodman, A.C., Thibodeau, T.G., 1998. Housing market segmentation. J. Hous. Econ.7  (2), 121–143. https://doi .org /10 .1006 /jhec .1998 .0229.
Guerini, M., Moneta, A., 2017. A method for agent-based models validation. J. Econ. Dyn. Control82,  125–141. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jedc .2017 .06 .001.
Guin, B., Korhonen, P., 2020. Does energy eﬃciency predict mortgage performance? Bank of England Staﬀ Working Paper (852). https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .
3532373.
Hiebert, P., Jaccard, I., Schüler, Y., 2018. Contrasting ﬁnancial and business cycles: stylized facts and candidate explanations. J. Financ. Stab. 38, 72–80. https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jfs .2018 .06 .002.
Iacoviello, M., 2005. House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the business cycle. Am. Econ. Rev. 95 (3), 739–764. https://doi .org /10 .1257 /
0002828054201477.
Iacoviello, M., Neri, S., 2010. Housing market spillovers: evidence from an estimated DSGE model. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon.2  (2), 125–164. https://doi .org /10 .1257 /
mac .2 .2 .125.
Jancsik, A., Michalkó, G., Csernyik, M., 2018. Megosztás megosztottság nélkül–az airbnb és a budapesti szálláshelypiac átalakulása. Közgazd. Szle.65  (3), 259–286. 
https://doi .org /10 .18414 /KSZ .2018 .3 .259.
Jansen, M.J., 1999. Analysis of variance designs for model output. Comput. Phys. Commun.117  (1–2), 35–43. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /S0010 -4655(98 )00154 -4.
Kannan, P., Rabanal, P., Scott, A.M., 2012. Monetary and macroprudential policy rules in a model with house price booms. B.E. J. Macroecon. 12 (1). https://
doi .org /10 .1515 /1935 -1690 .2268.
Kaszowska-Mojsa, J., Pipie´n, M., 2020. Macroprudential policy in a heterogeneous environment – an application of agent-based approach in systemic risk modelling. 
Entropy22  (2), 129. https://doi .org /10 .3390 /e22020129.
Kaza, N., Quercia, R.G., Tian, C.Y., 2014. Home energy eﬃciency and mortgage risks. Cityscape16  (1), 279–298.
Kelly, R., McCann, F., O’Toole, C., 2018. Credit conditions, macroprudential policy and house prices. J. Hous. Econ.41,  153–167. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jhe .2018 .
05 .005.
Keys, B.J., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2013. Mortgage ﬁnancing in the housing boom and bust. In: Housing and the Financial Crisis. In: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, pp.143–204.
Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Econ.105  (2), 211–248. https://doi .org /10 .1086 /262072.
Kouwenberg, R., Zwinkels, R.C., 2015. Endogenous price bubbles in a multi-agent system of the housing market. PLoS ONE 10 (6), e0129070. https://doi .org /10 .
1371 /journal .pone .0129070.
Kuang, P., 2014. A model of housing and credit cycles with imperfect market knowledge. Eur. Econ. Rev. 70, 419–437. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .euroecorev .2014 .
06 .013.
Laliotis, D., Buesa, A., Leber, M., Población, J., 2020. An agent-based model for the assessment of LTV caps. Quant. Finance20  (10), 1721–1748. https://doi .org /10 .
1080 /14697688 .2020 .1733058.
Lambertini, L., Mendicino, C., Punzi, M.T., 2013. Leaning against boom–bust cycles in credit and housing prices. J. Econ. Dyn. Control37  (8), 1500–1522. https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jedc .2013 .03 .008.
Lambertini, L., Mendicino, C., Punzi, M.T., 2017. Expectations-driven cycles in the housing market. Econ. Model.60,  297–312. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .econmod .
2016 .10 .004.
Lamperti, F., 2018. Empirical validation of simulated models through the gsl-div: an illustrative application. J. Econ. Interact. Coord. 13 (1), 143–171. https://
doi .org /10 .1007 /s11403 -017 -0206 -3.
Lauretta, E., 2018. The hidden soul of ﬁnancial innovation: an agent-based modelling of home mortgage securitization and the ﬁnance-growth nexus. Econ. Model.68,  
51–73. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .econmod .2017 .04 .019.
Lee, J., Song, J., 2015. Housing and business cycles in Korea: a multi-sector Bayesian DSGE approach. Econ. Model.45,  99–108. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .econmod .
2014 .11 .009.
Levine, A.S., Frank, R.H., Dijk, O., 2010. Expenditure cascades. Available at SSRN 1690612. https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .1690612.
Lin, Z., Vandell, K.D., 2007. Illiquidity and pricing biases in the real estate market. Real Estate Econ. 35 (3), 291–330. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /j .1540 -6229 .2007 .
00191 .x.

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 155 (2023) 104738
59
B.Mér˝o,A.Borsos,Z.Hosszúetal.
Lux, T., Zwinkels, R.C., 2018. Chapter 8 - Empirical validation of agent-based models. In: Hommes, C., LeBaron, B. (Eds.), Handbook of Computational Economics, 
vol. 4. Elsevier, pp.437–488.
Magliocca, N., Saﬁrova, E., McConnell, V., Walls, M., 2011. An economic agent-based model of coupled housing and land markets (chalms). Comput. Environ. Urban 
Syst.35  (3), 183–191. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .compenvurbsys .2011 .01 .002.
Mell, H., Baumard, N., André, J.-B., 2021. Time is money. Waiting costs explain why selection favors steeper time discounting in deprived environments. Evol. Hum. 
Behav.42  (4), 379–387. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .evolhumbehav .2021 .02 .003.
Mendicino, C., Punzi, M.T., 2014. House prices, capital inﬂows and macroprudential policy. J. Bank. Finance49,  337–355. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jbankﬁn .2014 .
06 .007.
MNB, 2022. Housing market report.
Mora-Sanguinetti, J.S., Rubio, M., 2014. Recent reforms in Spanish housing markets: an evaluation using a DSGE model. Econ. Model.44,  S42–S49. https://doi .org /
10 .1016 /j .econmod .2014 .04 .028.
Moro, A., Nuño, G., 2012. Does total-factor productivity drive housing prices? A growth-accounting exercise for four countries. Econ. Lett.115  (2), 221–224. https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .econlet .2011 .12 .038.
Ortalo-Magne, F., Rady, S., 2006. Housing market dynamics: on the contribution of income shocks and credit constraints. Rev. Econ. Stud.73  (2), 459–485.
Ortega, E., Rubio, M., Thomas, C., 2011. House purchase versus rental in Spain. Banco de España Working Paper Series (1108).
Ozel, B., Nathanael, R.C., Raberto, M., Teglio, A., Cincotti, S., 2019. Macroeconomic implications of mortgage loan requirements: an agent-based approach. J. Econ. 
Interact. Coord.14  (1), 7–46. https://doi .org /10 .1007 /s11403 -019 -00238 -5.
Pangallo, M., Nadal, J.-P., Vignes, A., 2019. Residential income segregation: a behavioral model of the housing market. J. Econ. Behav. Organ.159,  15–35. https://
doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jebo .2019 .01 .010.
Pawson, H., Martin, C., Lawson, J., Whelan, S., Aminpour, F., 2022. Assisting ﬁrst homebuyers: an international policy review. AHURI Final Report(381). https://
doi .org /10 .18408 /ahuri7127201.
Plöchl, K., Obádovics, C., 2021. A csok-támogatást igénylök vizsgálata az elözetes gyermekvállalás és az ingatlanszerzés mértéke szempontjából egy hitelintézet adatai 
alapján. Hitelint. Szle. (Financ. Econ. Rev.)20  (3), 80–109. https://doi .org /10 .25201 /HSZ .20 .3 .80109.
Rubio, M., Carrasco-Gallego, J.A., 2014. Macroprudential and monetary policies: implications for ﬁnancial stability and welfare. J. Bank. Finance 49, 326–336. 
https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jbankﬁn .2014 .02 .012.
Rubio, M., Comunale, M., 2017. Lithuania in the euro area: monetary transmission and macroprudential policies. East. Eur. Econ.55  (1), 29–49. https://doi .org /10 .
1080 /00128775 .2016 .1255558.
Saunders, T., Tulip, P., 2020. A model of the Australian housing market. Econ. Rec.96,  1–25. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /1475 -4932 .12537.
Schmitt-Grohé, S., Uribe, M., 2012. What’s news in business cycles. Econometrica80  (6), 2733–2764. https://doi .org /10 .3982 /ECTA8050.
Tarne, R., 2022. Homeowners’ ﬁnancial vulnerability over the house price cycle, vol. 2022, No. 216. Macroeconomic Policy Institute (IMK) of Hans-Böckler-
Foundation.
Tarne, R., Bezemer, D., Theobald, T., 2022. The eﬀect of borrower-speciﬁc loan-to-value policies on household debt, wealth inequality and consumption volatility: an 
agent-based analysis. J. Econ. Dyn. Control144,  104526. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jedc .2022 .104526.
