A multi-agent model of urban processes: Modelling relocation processes
and price setting in housing markets
Dick Ettema *
Utrecht University, Faculty of Geographical Sciences, Urban and Regional Research Centre Utrecht, PO Box 80.115, 3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands
article info
Article history:
Received 10 September 2009
Received in revised form 30 June 2010
Accepted 30 June 2010
Keywords:
Agent based model
Housing market
Price setting
abstract
This paper introduces an agent-based micro-simulation model of housing market processes. The model
describes aggregate housing market developments, such as price and turnover, as the outcome of house-
holds’ decisions to search for a new dwelling, accept an offered dwelling or sell their dwelling. An impor-
tant feature of the model is that households’ decisions are based on perceptions of housing market
probabilities. Households update these perceptions based on observed bargaining outcomes in the mar-
ket. The model was tested in a simulation experiment and appeared to respond plausibly to different
market settings in terms of prices and households’ perception of the market.
/C2112010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Land use transport interaction (LUTI) models have been used
for several decades to evaluate the impact of transportation and
land use policies. LUTI models describe the mutual interaction
between land use, transport and accessibility. That is to say,
they model travel behaviour as a function of the spatial distri-
bution of functions over space, but also recognise that urban
development is at least partly inﬂuenced by accessibility. A cru-
cial element in such models is to model how population, de-
ﬁned by various segments, is distributed across space, since
this distribution determines to a large extent which activity
and travel patterns will evolve. The ﬁrst generation of LUTI
models (e.g. Lowry, 1963 ) were aggregate models (see Timmer-
mans, 2003 ), describing the allocation of population as an aggre-
gate category. Increasingly, however, LUTI models have become
disaggregate models, culminating in agent-based micro-simula-
tion models (e.g. Benenson, 1998; Ettema, de Jong, Timmermans,
& Bakema, 2006; Miller, Hunt, Abraham, & Salvini, 2004; Moeckel,
Wegener, & Schwarze, 2005; Waddell et al., 2003 ), which de-
scribe the location behaviour of individual households. These
models not only adopt a representation of individual house-
holds, but also deﬁne individual dwellings as spatially ﬁxed
agents in the model. Given this level of detail, modelling the
spatial allocation of population across space requires a proper
representation of households’ decisions to locate into a certain
dwelling and to switch from one dwelling to another. In other
words, modelling housing markets becomes increasingly
important in the context of agent-based LUTI models. It is
important to note that housing prices play an important role
in this respect. Competition for housing will increase prices,
and may force households with smaller budgets to live in
houses and in places which are not their ﬁrst preference. Even-
tually, this will also impact on travel patterns, e.g. if they are
forced to accept longer commute distances.
Housing market processes and price formation have to some ex-
tent been addressed by existing agent-based and/or land use mod-
els. The ILUMASS model ( Moeckel et al., 2005; Wegener, 1985 )
describes households’ relocations as a search process in which
households evaluate dwellings one by one and accept a dwelling
if it provides a signiﬁcant improvement over their current dwell-
ing. However, the model does not describe how housing prices
are the outcome of transactions between buyer and seller, which
in turn depend on spending power and preferences of the buyer
and perception of the market by buyer and seller. Instead, ILUMASS
describes price setting as being determined by an aggregate
function of the number of vacant dwellings in an area. Urbansim
(Waddell et al., 2003 ) models the spatial distribution of population
as a yearly allocation process, rather than as the outcome of
individual housing careers. Price formation is modelled at an
aggregate level using hedonic regression, which is not depending
on the demand for housing in the market, but only on characteris-
tics of the dwelling and its environment.
Benenson (1998) describes a dynamic model in which the value
of dwellings is a function of the economic status of residents and
the value of surrounding houses. The relocation decision of house-
holds is a function of economic status, local prices and cognitive
dissonance. However, households do not have a perception of
0198-9715/$ - see front matter /C2112010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2010.06.005
* Tel.: +31 30 2532918; fax: +31 30 2532037.
E-mail address: d.ettema@geo.uu.nl
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems
journal homepage: www. elsevier.com/locat e/compenvurbsys

market conditions such as vacancy or prices. Also, there is no expli-
cit representation of individual dwellings.
Torrens (2007) describes a model based on geographical agents
(GA), which may be either dwellings or households. This model is
purely microscopic and introduces vacancy chains, i.e. a moving
household occupies a vacant dwelling and adds its former dwelling
to the vacant dwelling pool. Households search for a new dwelling
after a stress-based relocation decision, using a random search
methodology. Price setting of vacant dwellings is based on neigh-
bourhood characteristics (such as average price in the neighbour-
hood) and includes a discount mechanism to lower the price if a
dwelling has been on the market for a longer time. It is, however,
not based on market conditions.
Taken together, existing multi-agent models of land use and
residential relocation account well for households’ decisions about
whether or not to relocate and what dwelling to accept, but repre-
sentation of price formation takes place in a rather pragmatic, ad
hoc way. As highlighted by Parker and Filatova (2008) , properly
modelling land and housing markets in agent-based environments
requires representation of the process of bidding between buyers
and sellers, based on both sides’ expectations and perception of
market opportunities. As a consequence, price cannot be inter-
preted as an indicator of demand for housing and the potential
for land development.
Looking at the broader literature that focuses on modelling
housing markets, various approaches are observed. A number of
studies have developed formal economic models of the demand
for dwellings/real estate ( Arnott, Braid, Davidson, & Pines, 1999;
Martinez & Roy, 2004; Van der Vlist, Rietveld, & Nijkamp, 2002 ).
These models typically are formal economic models, assuming that
households/ﬁrms have complete information and act rationally.
They also assume that the housing market develops into some
equilibrium state, where supply, demand and prices are constant.
For instance, Arnott et al. (1999) provide proof of the equilibrium
in the housing market, following from aggregate functions of sup-
ply and demand. These models are limited in that they fail to ac-
count for the fact that agents in the housing market often have
imperfect information and may be subject to budget constraints,
which may lead to volatility of the market. Another aspect that
they do not take into account is the inherent uncertainty of supply
and demand in the housing market, which affects household deci-
sion-making and also the market clearance process. These charac-
teristics are related to a lack of speciﬁc representation of agents,
preventing the representation of uncertainty and incomplete
information adequately.
Several studies (e.g. Tryfos, 1981; Ben-Shahar, 2002; Turnbull &
Sirmans, 1993 ) have developed models of price setting and price
taking under uncertainty. In general, these models acknowledge
that households are uncertain whether a dwelling will sell at a cer-
tain price within a certain period or whether a dwelling with cer-
tain characteristics will be available in the market within a certain
period. Assuming that households have some idea about the prob-
ability of these events, the models describe how decisions are
made that maximise the utility or the expected payoff. However,
they assume that these probabilities are known and constant,
whereas in reality these probabilities will change over time. As a
consequence, these models do not describe how households/indi-
viduals update their perception of certain market probabilities.
Devisch, Timmermans, and Arentze (2009) account for this
shortcoming by explicitly describing transaction as the outcome
of a bargaining process between buyer and seller, in which buyers
and sellers update their perceptions of market probabilities based
on the outcomes of the bidding process. Devisch et al.’s model is
the ﬁrst to acknowledge the fact that agents learn from market
events and that they use this information in subsequent bidding
decisions. However, their model is limited to a bilateral process,
and ignores the fact that individuals will also learn from transac-
tions between other agents in which they do not participate. In
addition, Devisch et al. treat shadow utility (the expected utility
from cutting of the bidding process and engage in a new bidding
process with another agent) as exogenous, where it is in reality de-
rived from observations of market transactions.
Hence, it is concluded that a considerable literature on model-
ling housing market processes is available that can be used to
increase the theoretical underpinning and practical usefulness of
LUTI models. In line with this observation, this paper presents a
multi-agent model of household relocations, which describes
household’s decision to search for another dwelling, the bargaining
process between house sellers and house buyers and the price
setting. Important aspects of the approach are:
1. The incorporation of life cycle effects, leading to changed pref-
erences over time.
2. The modelling and updating of households’ perception of the
availability and prices of dwellings, based on observed market
transactions.
3. The modelling of relocations as the outcome of a bargaining
process.
4. The impact of uncertainty on households decision-making
processes.
The model is implemented as a multi-agent model, implying
that aggregate housing market characteristics such as price levels
are the outcome of individual bargaining processes.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 outlines the formal
model of housing market behaviour that was developed. Section 3
describes the organisation and operational decisions of a numerical
simulation used to test the model. Section 4 describes the results of
the numerical simulation in terms of consistency between behav-
ioural parameters and context and aggregate market outcomes.
Section 5, ﬁnally, draws conclusions about the model application
and charts avenues for further research.
2. Model description
Underlying the model system are some central notions. The ﬁrst
notion is that households have, at all times, the opportunity to
enter the housing market in order to try to ﬁnd a dwelling that is
more attractive than their current dwelling. Whether they decide
to do so, depends on their assessment of the opportunities to
improve their residential situation. In this respect, we deﬁne a
set of vacant dwellings, from which a searching household can se-
lect one. Each vacant dwelling (also termed an offered dwelling), is
offered at a certain list price, i.e. the price at which the sellers
wants to sell the dwelling. Second, when searching for a dwelling
on the housing market, buyers will trade-off the utility of an of-
fered dwelling against the utility of their current dwelling and
the expected utility of other dwellings in the market. That is to
say, they will not accept an offered dwelling if there is a reasonable
probability of ﬁnding a dwelling with a higher utility in the market.
Third, when selling a dwelling a household will set the list price
such as to maximise the expected outcome, based on its perception
of the probability of selling at a particular price. Fourth, percep-
tions regarding the probability of selling and the probability of
being offered a dwelling are updated based on perceived outcomes
of bargaining processes. The various components of the model will
be described hereafter in more detail.
2.1. Searching for a new dwelling
An important decision in the housing market process is house-
holds’ decision to actively search for another dwelling. Following
2 D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11

Brown and Moore (1970) we assume that this decision depends on
a trade-off between the utility derived from the current dwelling
and the perception of the utility that can be achieved by moving
to another dwelling. In this respect, we assume that the utility of
the current dwelling, Uc is a function of characteristics of the dwell-
ing XD
i
/C16/C17
(e.g. number of rooms, dwelling type, price) and of the
household XH
i
/C16/C17
(e.g. household composition, income, life cycle
stage), as in many models of residential preference (e.g. Clark &
Onaka, 1983; Walker & Li, 2006 ). In equation:
Uc ¼ fX D
1 ; ... ; XD
n ; XH
1 ; ... ; XH
n
/C16/C17
ð1Þ
In our model system, the parameters in the utility function are
treated as exogenous, i.e. representing the intrinsic valuation of a
dwelling. The same parameters are used to deﬁne the utility de-
rived from different dwellings. This may be concrete dwellings
(such as the current or an offered dwelling) or the utility based
on expected dwelling characteristics (such as the optimal dwelling
Uo. In this respect, we assume that households hold a perception of
the optimal utility Uo that they can obtain from the market. This
optimal utility is the outcome of households’ perception of the
housing market. Each household will observe other dwellings that
are available in the market, through adds, Internet, by personal vis-
it or through hearsay. In particular, we assume that the optimal
utility is the maximum of the utilities of all dwellings a household
has perceived in some predeﬁned period:
Uo ¼ maxðU1; U2; ... ; UnÞð 2Þ
The optimal utility also depends on characteristics of the dwell-
ing and of the household itself. Note that the concept of optimal
utility, does not imply that households optimise their utility by
exhaustively evaluating a choice set. Instead, they apply a satisﬁc-
ing mechanism as we will see later. The optimal utility serves to
trigger households to start a dwelling search process. If the optimal
utility is larger than the current utility, a household may be trig-
gered to start searching for another dwelling. However, the differ-
ence should exceed some threshold value Ts to warrant the costs
involved in searching and an eventual move:
Uo > Uc þ Ts ð3Þ
A straightforward interpretation of the threshold value would
be to represent the cost of moving, which is balanced against the
gain in utility. Note that a discrepancy between the utilities of
the current and the optimal dwelling may be due to various rea-
sons. First, the utilities of the current dwelling may change because
of a change in households’ characteristics, e.g. the household com-
position or the work location. In addition, other dwellings may
become more attractive, for instance because the household in-
come has increased. Finally, there may be new dwellings that are
added to the market that lead to a change in Uo, while leaving Uc
unchanged. It should also be noted that the optimal utility is only
an abstract notion that triggers the household to start exploring
the housing market. The eventual decision to relocate depends
on many more factors, such as the actual availability of dwellings
and the household’s perception of it and the outcome of the bar-
gaining process. This process also includes a trade-off between
immediate buying/selling of a dwelling versus waiting for a more
attractive offer and saving or losing money (see Sections 3.2 and
3.3).
2.2. Searching and negotiating
Once a household has decided to enter the housing market to
search for a new dwelling, its ﬁrst step is to search for available
dwellings. In this respect, we assume that a household will search
in databases of available dwellings, and that each dwelling has the
same probability of being noted by the searching household. We
further assume that the number of available dwellings a household
can evaluate is limited to n dwellings. Once an available dwelling
constitutes a sufﬁcient improvement over the current dwelling,
the household decides to engage in a bargaining process. This con-
dition is expressed as:
Ui > Uc þ Tn ð4Þ
where Ui is the utility of the ith evaluated dwelling. In the bargain-
ing process, we assume that a buyer decides whether or not to ac-
cept an available dwelling at the listed price. This approach is
different from Devisch et al.’s approach, who allow for buyer and
seller to engage in a process of bidding and counter bidding.
Although it is recognised that a process of bidding and counter bid-
ding constitutes a realistic description of housing market processes,
we feel that the procedure proposed here adequately represents
buyers’ and sellers’ considerations regarding acceptance of an of-
fered dwelling or setting a list price, especially since the perception
of market probabilities is explicitly modelled. Note also that we as-
sume one-to-one negotiations between buyer and seller, and do not
consider transactions as the outcome of auctions. This is done since
the vast majority of transactions on the Dutch housing markets is
the outcome of one-to-one negotiations.
For the buyer to accept the offered dwelling, two conditions
need to be met. First, the utility of the offered dwelling should con-
stitute a sufﬁcient improvement over the current dwelling. In
equation:
Ui > Uc þ Tb ð5Þ
Since our current model does not include a bidding/counter bid-
ding process, the most reasonable assumption would be that
Tb = Tn. The second condition that needs to be met is that the utility
of the offered dwelling ( Ui) is larger than the expected utility of
other dwellings in the market. In other words, a household will
not accept the offered dwelling if it believes that there is a reason-
able probability of ﬁnding a more attractive dwelling within a rea-
sonable time. The expected utility of other dwellings is deﬁned
relative to the optimal utility Uo. The expected optimal utility
(E[Uo]) than expresses the utility derived from the optimal dwell-
ing (Uo) weighted against the probability of obtaining such a dwell-
ing (further details are provided in Section 3.4). Thus, if both
necessary conditions are met, ( Ui > Uc + Tb and Ui > E[Uo]), the
household will decide to buy the dwelling. By deﬁnition, this im-
plies that the list price, which is accepted, is lower or equal than
the WTP, deﬁned in economic theory as the maximum price a
household would want to pay based on its preferences, budget
and the dwelling characteristics. Although WTP is not a factor in
our model as such, it would in our approach depend not only on
dwelling and buyer characteristics, but also on the perception of
the market, as represented by E[Uo]. If a buying household accepts
an offered dwelling, it will move to that dwelling, and becomes a
seller of the original dwelling. That is to say, it will determine
the appropriate list price (see Section 3.3) and wait for a buyer
to accept. The model does not include a direct link between the
price obtained for the previous dwelling and the ability to but
the new house. Implicitly, this is accounted for by changes in the
cost sensitivity parameter in Eq. (13) resulting in higher income
households having a preference for larger and more expensive
dwelling. In line with practice on the Dutch housing market,
households buy a dwelling before selling their current one. They
respond to not selling the dwelling by lowering the list price, in
the end avoiding a situation of being stuck with two dwellings.
As noted before, the model assumes that the buyer either accepts
the offered dwelling or withdraws from the bargaining process.
This might lead to slightly different results as compared to a
D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11 3

situation where buyers and sellers engage in a Nash bargaining
procedure with bidding and counter bidding. In particular, if the
willingness-to-pay of the buyer exceeds the list price set by the
seller, both agents would be expected to bargain about the distri-
bution of the consumer surplus. Consequently, the model proposed
here tends to overpredict the price of realised prices by allocating
the full consumer surplus to the seller. On the other hand, the list
price is set by the seller based on the expectation of being able to
sell the dwelling at time t + 1 if the bargaining process at time t
fails. This will decrease the sellers willingness to settle for a lower
price than the list price. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that the
model could beneﬁt from including a procedure of bidding and
counter bidding analogous to Devisch et al. (2009) . The emphasis
of the current model has, however, been on representing the effect
of the presence of other buyers and sellers on price formation, in
which case agents’ perceptions of the probabilities of selling and
receiving an offer and the expected value of selling/buying later
are crucial (see e.g. Coles & Muthoo, 2003 ).
2.3. Setting the list price
As noted before, a household searching a dwelling will respond
to the list price set by the selling household. We assume that a sell-
ing household sets the list price L such as to maximise the expected
selling price ( E[L]). In determining the expected price, we follow
Tryfos (1981) reasoning. First we assume that for each potential list
price Li, there is a probability Ps(Li) of selling the house within a gi-
ven time period. This probability is endogenous and is updated
based on simulated transaction (see Section 3.5). Obviously, the
higher the price, the smaller the probability of selling the dwelling.
In addition, it is assumed that if the dwelling is not sold in period 1,
it is offered at a reduced list price in period 2, thereby increasing
the probability of selling. If the dwelling is not sold in period 2 it
is again offered at a reduced list price in period 3. Following this
reasoning, the expected price based on list price Li (E[Li]) equals:
EðLiÞ¼ PsðLiÞLi þð 1 /C0 PsðLiÞÞð1 /C0 d1ÞEða1LiÞð 6Þ
where d1 is a discount factor, accounting for the disutility of a later
payoff and a1 is a factor representing the decrease in the list price
per time step. Thus, using the recursive formulation (6), the
expected payoff for each list price can be determined. The house-
hold will then choose the list price resulting in the highest payoff.
L ¼ max
i
½EðLiÞ/C138 ð 7Þ
In the current model formulation a1 is deﬁned as exogenous. In
reality, a1 should be based on a seller’s perception of selling prob-
abilities. For instance, if demand is high the drop of list price
should be less to maximise the proﬁt. If sellers are assumed to
act rationally, they may be expected not only to optimise over Li
but also over a1. In the current version, a1 represents a general no-
tion that the list price is lowered the longer a dwelling is on the
market, although the sensitivity of the outcome on a1 is tested in
various scenarios. In economic theory (see Parker & Filatova,
2008), the seller would have a certain willingness to accept
(WTA), which depends on characteristics of the offered dwelling
and ﬁnancial resources held by the seller. WTA is not represented
as such in our model, since buyers do not make counter bids and
only accept (or not) a list price. However, we note that a seller
would trade-off a counter bid against the option not to sell to the
buyer and offer at a reduced price in the market. The expected out-
come of the latter would then determine his WTA.
2.4. Expected utility of the optimal dwelling
Likewise, a buying household will make an assessment of the
expected utility of any dwelling in the market. This expected utility
is based on the optimal utility Uo, which is based on characteristics
Xo and Lo. In this respect, we assume that each household has a per-
ceived probability Po(Xo, Lo) of being offered a dwelling at the opti-
mal price Lo. We assume that if the household is not offered the
dwelling at price Lo, it will increase the price it wants to pay with
a factor a2, thereby increasing the probability Po(Xo, a2Lo) of receiv-
ing an appropriate offer, but reducing the utility U(Xo, a2L) derived
from the dwelling. More precisely, the expected utility of an ab-
stract dwelling with characteristics X and price L can be expressed
as
EUðX; LÞ¼ PoðX; LÞUðX; LÞþð 1 /C0 PoðX; LÞÞð1 /C0 d2ÞEUðX; a2LÞð 8Þ
where d2 is a discount factor representing the disutility of having to
wait longer for a new dwelling.
2.5. Perception updating
In the above, we have deﬁned the setting of the list price and
the expected utility, based on the probability of selling and the
probability of receiving an offer of a particular dwelling at a partic-
ular price. The probability of selling is deﬁned as:
PsðX; LÞ¼ 1=ð1 þ expðb1 þ b2ðL /C0 SðXÞÞ ð 9Þ
The probability of receiving an offer is deﬁned as:
PoðX; LÞ¼ 1=ð1 þ expðc1 þ c2ðL /C0 SðXÞÞ ð 10Þ
where SðXÞ is the average price of a dwelling with characteristics X.
Since, in our application size is the only characteristic of dwellings,
SðXÞ is determined based on the average price per size unit, derived
from simulated transaction in the previous time period. Thus, we
assume that the probability of selling and receiving an offer
depends on the difference between the list price and the average
market price of a particular dwelling. A higher list price reduces
the probability of the dwelling being sold, and a lower required
price (by a buyer) reduces the probability of an offer. According to
our model, individuals’ beliefs of the above probabilities are repre-
sented by ‘beliefs’ they hold regarding the parameters beta and
gamma. In this respect, we assume that individuals update their
perceptions regarding the parameters b1, b2, c1 and c2 according
to a Bayesian updating procedure ( Curlette, 2006 ). The Bayesian
procedure is based in Bayes Theorem, which is deﬁned as:
PðAjBÞ¼ PðBjAÞPðBÞ
PðAÞ ð11Þ
where P(A|B) is the probability of A given evidence B, P(B|A) is the
probability of B given A, and P(A) and P(B) are the a priori beliefs
about the probability of A and B. The formula can be used to update
the a priori belief about the probability of A, given new evidence B.
For instance, to describe someone’s belief updating about the prob-
ability that it will rain given that it is cloudy, we could rewrite Eq.
(11) as:
PðrainjcloudyÞ¼ PðcloudyjrainÞPðrainÞ
PðcloudyÞ
¼ PðcloudyjrainÞPðrainÞ
PðcloudyjrainÞþ Pðcloudyjno rainÞ ð12Þ
Assuming the a priori expectation of rain ( P(rain)) is 0.5, that it
is always cloudy when it rains ( P(cloudy|rain) = 1) and that the
probability that is cloudy if it does not rain ( P(cloudy|no rain )) is
0.6, the belief that it will rain given that it is cloudy becomes:
4 D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11

PðrainjcloudyÞ¼ 1 /C3 0:5
1 /C3 0:5 þ 0:6 /C3 0:5 ¼ 0:625 ð13Þ
In a similar vein, we assume in our model that buyers and sell-
ers update their a priori beliefs about the correct parameters b1 and
b2 (or c1 and c2) based on observations of transactions and their
likelihood given the initial parameters. In this respect, we assume
that individuals evaluate a limited number of candidate solution
sets, being combinations of b1 and b2 (or c1 and c2) values. It is as-
sumed that values of b1 and b2 (or c1 and c2) can take a limited
number of values, deﬁned as 90%, 95%, 100%, 105% and 110% of
the current value. For instance, when updating the Ps(X, L) function,
the probability that a set of parameters b equals the ‘‘true” set b/C3
equals:
Pðb ¼ b/C3 jX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnÞ
¼ Pðb ¼ b/C3 ÞPðX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnjb ¼ b/C3 Þ
PðX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnÞ ð14Þ
In this equation, P(b = b/C3 ) is the a priori probability of b being
the correct set of parameters. Since in our approach we do not
work with a ﬁxed set of solutions, but rather deﬁne them relative
to the most recent estimates, we assume that the a priori probabil-
ity for all solutions is equal. PðX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnjb ¼ b/C3 Þ
represents the probability of a certain set of transaction outcomes,
given that b is the correct set of parameters. That is to say, the
probability is derived from observed transactions (sales) and how
likely they are according to parameters using Eq. (9). This implies
that we can calculate this probability as the relative goodness-of-
ﬁt in a similar way as in discrete choice model estimations.
PðX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnÞ, ﬁnally, represents the probability that
a series of particular bargaining outcomes occurs. Although this
probability can be derived from the probabilities P(b = b/C3 ) and
PðX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnjb ¼ b/C3 Þ, it effectively serves to scale
the sum of the probabilities Pðbi ¼ b/C3 jX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnÞ
to unity.
Thus, effectively, Eq. (11) weights the various sets of possible
parameters by their goodness-of-ﬁt to the observed data. If we
term Pðbi ¼ b/C3 jX1 ... Xn; L1 ... Ln; r1 ... rnÞ P(bi) for convenience,
the new set of parameters is calculated as:
b ¼
P
i¼1;...;N biPðbiÞ
N ð15Þ
It is noted that the probabilities of selling and receiving an offer
are, in reality, not independent of each other. If demand is higher,
the probability of receiving an offer will diminish whereas the
probability of selling will ceteris paribus increase. Assuming that
the Bayesian updating procedure of beliefs is sufﬁciently efﬁcient,
similar trends would be expected in the perceived probabilities of
selling and offering. In the case of selling probability, the probabil-
ity of selling an ‘average’ dwelling should be related to the percent-
age of vacant dwellings sold per period. It should be noted
however, that this relationship is not one-to-one, due to heteroge-
neity in the characteristics of vacant dwellings.
It is also important to note that our model assumes that all
households are continuously able to update their perceptions with
respect to the probability of selling and receiving an offer. Thus,
also after having completed a transaction, households update their
perception of the functions (9) and (10) based on bargaining pro-
cesses and transactions that take place in the market. This may
lead to a new relocation if the household believes that it can im-
prove its residential utility according to Eqs. (1)–(3). At this stage
of the research we have not speciﬁed in detail how the perception
of bargaining processes and transactions takes place, and we sim-
ply assume that event e will be known by household h with prob-
ability p.
One way in which information is transferred is through mecha-
nisms such as social learning, in which households learn from
events experienced by other households that form part of the so-
cial network, and with whom information is exchanged. Modelling
this mechanism would however imply the detailed modelling of
social networks, which we consider a topic for future research.
Other sources from which information about market transactions
can be obtained are the Internet or newspaper ads. Representing
such information acquisition processes falls however outside the
scope of the current research. Therefore, we adopt the above ap-
proach, reﬂecting the intuitive notion that each household, even
when not actively exploring the housing market, will have some
perception of market characteristics such as the average price level
and the probability of ﬁnding/selling a dwelling at a particular
price.
2.6. To conclude
The interaction between the various decision-making aspects
described above is summarised in Fig. 1. The ﬁgure illustrates that
both buying and selling households base their decisions on their
perception of the housing market, represented by information
about transactions in the previous period and the availability of
vacant dwellings.
After having updated their perceptions, they decide whether to
search, negotiate (for a buying household) and how to set the list
price (for a selling household). When an offered dwelling is ac-
cepted, this results in a transaction, which then again serves to up-
date perceptions and beliefs in the next time step. A crucial aspect
is that households learn about market probabilities and prices
based on observed transactions.
Our approach bears resemblance to the approach by Filatova,
Parker, and van der Veen (2009) in that both models apply an
agent-based concept, in which buyers and sellers negotiate about
transactions in a land or housing market, and that aggregate price
levels result from individual decisions to but or sell. However,
there are also differences. First, willingness-to pay (WTP) in our
model is directly related to probabilities of obtaining a utility in
the longer run versus the price paid now. Thus, it is directly based
on perception of the market (i.e. probabilities of getting an offer,
updated by perceived market transactions) and not indirectly mod-
iﬁed using the number of buyers and sellers, as in Filatova et al.
(2009). Our model, unlike Filatova et al.’s (2009) model, is not spa-
tially explicit, and does not incorporate distance. This could be
added, but assumptions would have to be made about how the
geographical location of dwellings, relative to facilities and other
functions, adds to the attractiveness of the dwelling. Also, our
model does not describe land transactions and spatial develop-
ments (as Filatova et al. (2009)), but (re)allocation processes within
a ﬁxed dwelling stock, given individual dynamics of households.
At this stage, it should be emphasized that the model proposed
in this paper was deliberately designed as a micro-simulation
model, that yields insight into the impact of changes in (here)
exogenous variables such as the percentage of vacant dwellings
without formally requesting that equilibrium is reached. Formally,
this approach is in line with complexity theory, in that it assumes
path dependency and that it formally allows for the fact that prob-
abilistic procedures may give different outcomes based on identi-
cal starting values.
From a more practical point of view, it is noted that the com-
plexity of our model makes formal proof of convergence problem-
atic. We are aware that several studies describe analytical
approaches to ﬁnd the necessary conditions for convergence of
market systems ( Nyarko, 1997; Schinkel, Tuinstra, & Vermeulen,
2002). It is noted, however, that the model presented in this paper
is different in structure. First, it does not include an exogenous
D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11 5

demand function, but instead demand is represented by house-
holds deciding to acquire a house, which is endogenously mod-
elled. Second, households in the system are buyers and sellers
simultaneously, implying that they are responsible for both supply
and demand and act as buyers and sellers. In addition, agents are
dynamic in terms of their preferences and may enter or exit the
market. These additional conditions make analytical proof of mod-
el convergence increasingly difﬁcult. This is even more the case if
the model (as is our intention) will be linked to models of demog-
raphy, transportation and economic activity, as part of an urban
simulation model system ( Ettema et al., 2006 ).
Nevertheless, the value of the model depends on its ability to
simulate in a realistic way the responses on different situation in
the housing market. To this end, we tested robustness and conver-
gence behaviour through an empirical approach (see Section 5).
Not only did we test whether repeated runs lead to similar equilib-
ria in terms of price and number of transactions, we also tested
whether changes in housing market lead to plausible results.
3. Numerical simulation
3.1. Implementation
The model described in the above was tested in a numerical
simulation to test whether the effect of various variables has the
expected effect. The simulation includes 600 households, deﬁned
by income and age, and 600 + n dwellings, that are deﬁned by their
size only. Hence, there are fewer households than dwellings, as in
the real housing market. Obviously, both households and dwellings
can be characterised by a much wider range of variables. The
restriction to size and income has been applied for convenience
here, but the approach can easily be extended to more variables
without loss of generality. At the start of the simulation, incomes,
ages and sizes are randomly assigned to households and dwellings,
in the following ranges:
/C15 Household income: this is represented in a cost sensitivity
parameter ( u2) ranging from [ /C0 0.25 to /C0 0.75].
/C15 Household age [0–30 years].
/C15 Dwelling size [300–600 m 3].
In addition, it is assumed that households derive a utility from a
dwelling speciﬁed as:
Ui ¼ u1sizei þ u2 cos ti ð16Þ
Finally, since size is the only attribute of dwellings, we can de-
ﬁne a general price level as:
/C22s ¼
P
i¼1;...;N Li=sizei
N ð17Þ
where Li is the price at which dwelling i is sold. The model is initial-
ised by the following actions:
1. Determine the initial values of u, b, c and /C22s (see Table 1 ). The
values u1, u2 and /C22s are more or less arbitrary. b and c parame-
ters were selected to represent more or less realistic initial
probabilities that dwellings are sold or offered.
2. Determine list prices for all dwellings. Given sellers’ percep-
tions of a dwelling being sold for a particular price (according
to Eq. (9), based on the initial values of beta) the list price is
set such that the expected price is maximised (see Eq. (7)).
3. Assign households to a dwelling using a discrete choice model
(multinomial logit model or MNL, Ben-Akiva & Lerman, 1985 )
l, based on the utility function (16). The MNL model assigns a
household to a dwelling with a probability proportional to the
exponent of the utility, as deﬁned by Eq. (13). To this end, each
household is randomly offered 10 dwellings, and it then
Updating perception of
- prob. of an offer
- prob. of selling
- current utility
- expected optimal utility
pool of transactions
pool of vacant and non-vacant dwellings
decide to
-s e a r c h
- negotiate
- accept offer
- relocation
- current dwelling becomes  
vacant
pool of transactions
pool of vacant and non-vacant dwellings
Updating perception of
- prob. of an offer
- prob. of selling
- current utility
- expected optimal utility
Setting the listprice
Offer a dwelling
Transaction
t-1
t
Fig. 1. Dynamic process of housing market transactions.
6 D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11

chooses a dwelling according to the probabilities of the MNL
choice model. As a consequence, households may be forced to
choose from a suboptimal choice set, which does not include
their optimal dwelling. This represents limitations in the hous-
ing market, which may also occur in reality. It also creates a
base for further simulation, where households may improve
their residential conditions in the course of years. Note that
the MNL model is only used to initialise the model, and that
housing transactions during simulation are based on the more
advanced search and negotiation system outline above.
4. For each household, the optimal utility is determined. Since the
optimal utility is based on observations of other dwellings, we
randomly draw 10 dwellings for each household. For each
dwelling, the utility to the household is determined (based on
size and cost sensitivity). The maximum utility of the 10 dwell-
ings is considered to be the optimal utility.
Once the model is initialised, the housing career of each house-
hold is simulated during a number of time periods. Since this is a
numerical simulation used to illustrate the model mechanisms,
the duration of the time periods is arbitrary and does not necessar-
ily represent one year. Since prices are lowered at the end of each
period, it would be logical to assume that each time step represents
a period of several months.
3.2. Transactions
In each time period, we simulate a number of events for each
household. First, given a households’ current utility Uc and its opti-
mal utility Uo, it is determined whether the household decides to
search for a better dwelling, using equation 3 and assuming a
threshold values Ts of 1.05. Thus we assume that the household
should anticipate an increase in utility of at least 5% to warrant a
search for another dwelling.
If a household decides to search for another dwelling, it is as-
sumed that within each time step, it evaluates 10 dwellings to ﬁnd
out if it is useful to further explore the offered dwelling. To this
end, up to 10 vacant dwellings are randomly drawn. The ﬁrst
dwelling that meets condition 4 is further investigated to ﬁnd
out if it should be purchased. If none of the dwellings meets the re-
quired condition, the household decides not to move.
As noted before, the household will, before accepting he dwell-
ing, check the probability of ﬁnding a more attractive dwelling in
the market. Thus, the offered dwelling is accepted if the following
conditions hold:
Ui > Uc þ Tb and Ui > E½Uo/C138ð 18Þ
The above process is simulated for each household. In this re-
spect, it is assumed that a dwelling can be sold only once during
each time period, reﬂecting the time needed for transactions. This
implies that in case of a high demand for dwellings, the available
dwelling stock can be sold out. To assure that the probability of
ﬁnding a new dwelling is ceteris paribus equal for all households,
they are processed in random order. If a household accepts the of-
fered dwelling, a transaction takes place. The household is re-
corded as the owner of the new dwelling. Their old dwelling
becomes vacant and is available on the housing market. As noted
previously, we assumed, in line with Dutch practise, that buyer
and seller negotiate one-to one, and that buyers do not compete di-
rectly with each other in an auction. Indirectly, however, competi-
tion is accounted for. More buying households (or fewer vacant
dwellings) will lead to a higher probability of selling (also per-
ceived) and to higher list and sales prices.
3.3. Belief updating
As explained before, outcomes of negotiations are used to up-
date beliefs. In theory, this would take place on the individual level,
implying that each individual household has its own probability
functions (9) and (10) . That is to say, a household would observe
a number of transactions (which would be different for each
household) and based on that update its beliefs. In a large-scale
simulation, this would be computationally burdensome. In addi-
tion, much of the knowledge is in reality institutionalised in organ-
isations such as real estate agents, who have a strong impact on
households’ price setting and acceptance of dwellings. In addition,
the availability of databases on the Internet makes sure that every-
one has access to more or less the same information. For these rea-
sons, the numerical example uses a single updating mechanism for
all households simultaneously. It is assumed that there exists one
general belief regarding prices and market probabilities. Although
this ignores the fact that individuals will have different beliefs, it
still represents that fact that households have different perceptions
under different market situations. In addition, working toward an
individual belief updating mechanism can take place at a later
stage without materially changing the approach.
The updating of the beliefs about the probability of selling (Eq.
(9)) is based on observations of vacant dwellings in the market. For
each dwelling, the list price in relation to the average market price
is known, as well as the fact whether the dwelling was sold. Using
the Bayesian updating procedure, this information is used to up-
date the values of b1 and b2. Likewise, for each household, the opti-
mal dwelling and the associated utility is known. For this dwelling
the list price relative to the average market price is also known.
During the simulation, we record whether a dwelling with similar
utility is offered to the household. Again, this provides the input to
the Bayesian updating procedure, resulting in updated values of c1
and c2. Finally, the average price level /C22s is updated by calculating
the average price/m 3 for all sold dwellings in the time period.
3.4. Updating dwellings and households
Following each time step the households and dwellings are up-
dated. First, households’ age is adjusted. As a consequence, their
cost sensitivity will diminish, reﬂecting a structural increase in in-
come due to career development. In addition, the cost sensitivity
(in real terms) may further reduce due to inﬂation. Thus given that
ut
2 is the cost sensitivity parameter at time t, utþ1
2 equals:
utþ1
2 ¼ ut
2jk ð19Þ
where j is a factor (<1) accounting for diminishing cost sensitivity;
k is a factor (<1) accounting for inﬂation.
Since their preferences have changed (and possibly also the
housing market), the optimal utility is determined again, using
the same procedure described previously. Thus, both housing mar-
ket conditions and changed preferences may lead to a change in
the optimal utility, which in turn may trigger a relocation attempt.
In addition, we assume that the population of households is dy-
namic. That is to say, old households (of say 30 years) will leave
Table 1
Initial settings of parameters.
Parameter Initial value
u1 0.1
u2 /C0 0.025 to /C0 0.075
b1 0
b2 10
c1 2
c2 /C0 10
/C22s 1.2
D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11 7

the housing market, and will in turn be replaced by new house-
holds of age 0. In case of such an event, the dwelling of the house-
hold leaving the population becomes available. The new household
is assigned a random cost sensitivity, and chooses an available
dwelling using the MNL model outlined before. Note that the total
number of households remains constant, as does the number of va-
cant dwellings.
Following the updating of beliefs about market probabilities,
the list prices of available dwellings are updated. This is necessary
since a change in demand, for instance leading to a smaller proba-
bility of selling, will lead to a different list price. Thus, using the up-
dated probability functions (9) and (10) , the list price of all vacant
dwellings is determined, using Eqs. (6) and (7). In order to reﬂect
heterogeneity in the population, we assume that the discount fac-
tor is not constant but is a stochastic variable, drawn from a uni-
form distribution.
3.5. Scenarios
The model was run under a number of different scenarios, to
test the sensitivity of the model to different market conditions.
These scenarios are deﬁned relative to a base scenario with the fol-
lowing settings:
/C15 A vacancy rate of 5% (30 dwellings).
/C15 Threshold values Ts and Tn of 1.05.
/C15 A discount factor d1 with mean 0.035 (or 3.5%), drawn from
interval [0.00–0.07] (representing the disutility of selling the
dwelling at a later stage).
After ﬁrst investigating the base scenario, the following scenar-
ios will be tested relative to the base scenario:
/C15 Vacancy rates of 20% (120 dwellings), 10% (60 dwellings) and
2.5% (15 dwellings).
/C15 Threshold values Ts, Tn and Tb of 1.10.
/C15 Average discount factors of 0.02 (or 2% interval [0–4%]) and 0.06
(or 6% interval [0–12%]).
In each scenario, the model is run for 200 time steps. The result-
ing market situation is then described using the following
indicators:
/C15 UTIL: the average utility that households derive from their
dwelling,
/C15 UOPT: the average optimal utility households perceive,
/C15 Price: the average dwelling price per m 3,
/C15 %wait: the percentage of households that is offered a dwelling,
but does not accept it in anticipation of a better dwelling,
/C15 P0s: the probability that a ‘standard’ dwelling is sold,
/C15 P0o: the probability of receiving an offer with utility equal to Uo
or higher,
/C15 %sold: the percentage of vacant dwellings that is sold in a cer-
tain time period,
/C15 #search: the number of households searching a new dwelling,
/C15 #sold: the number of households buying a dwelling.
For each scenario, 100 runs were carried out, allowing us to test
the stability and robustness of the model.
4. Results
4.1. Base scenario
Figs. 2–5 represent the simulation process in the base scenario,
based on one model run. Comparisons with other runs (not
included in this paper) suggest that similar patterns arise for the
other runs. Fig. 2 indicates that in the beginning of the process,
about 300 households decide to search for a new dwelling, caused
by a discrepancy between their current and optimal utility. Appar-
ently, the initial assignment does, for many households, not result
in a satisfactory dwelling, leading to a high share of households
searching for another dwelling. During the simulation, the number
of households searching for a dwelling drops to 160 after about 25
steps, but then increases to about 400. This may be caused by the
increasing difference between actual and optimal utility (see Fig. 5)
which triggers households to look for a more attractive dwelling.
The number of households that actually succeeds in ﬁnding a
new dwelling is much lower (20–30) due to the limited amount
of available dwellings and the limited number of dwellings a
household can evaluate. This number is rather stable throughout
the simulation, most likely due to the restriction in the number
of available dwellings.
Fig. 3 suggests that the list price and actual price of an average
dwelling steadily increase during the simulation period, to stabilise
at about 1000 after 120 time steps. This suggests that the initial
market price assumed at the start of the simulation is too low
and does not properly represent supply and demand. We ﬁnd that,
given sellers perception of selling probabilities, list prices are set
higher than current market prices, and that sufﬁcient buyers are
willing to pay these higher prices. The sellers who do not sell in
a period will lower their prices, so that the actual increase in mar-
ket prices is less than the difference between list prices and current
market prices. This process goes on during the duration of the sim-
ulation. Eventually, the increase will lead to a decrease in demand,
lower probabilities of selling and lower list prices, leading to a sta-
bilisation of the prices.
It should be noted that there are two aspects that make this
steady increase possible. First, the model allows households who
sell their dwelling to use the revenue of their old dwelling to ﬁ-
nance their new dwelling. As a result, price increases in the market
affect households already owning a dwelling much less serious.
However, for households who are new to the market and have
not yet accumulated capital as a result of increased house prices,
the utility of a new dwelling will be much lower. This mechanism
accounts for the steadily decreasing utility. Second, the model in its
current formulation does not take into account budget constraints,
stemming from the fact that only a limited amount of household
income can be spent on housing costs. In the current formulation,
households entering the market will buy the most attractive dwell-
ing offered to them, even if it would exceed reasonable budget lim-
itations. Consequently, a decrease in demand due to excessive
prices is not represented to the extent required. Incorporation of
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
1 21 41 61 81 101 121 141 161 181
time step
nrsearch
nrsold
Fig. 2. Development of number of households searching and buying a dwelling.
8 D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11

budget constraints is therefore seen as a ﬁrst important extension
to the model.
We ﬁnd that the perceived probability of being offered a dwell-
ing with the optimal utility develops to about 30–25% ( Fig. 4). The
share of households that decides not to accept an offered dwelling
even if the utility of the offered dwelling ﬂuctuates strongly during
the simulation period, possibly due to the rather small numbers
concerned here. On average 30–40% of the households adopt this
strategy.
Finally, Fig. 5 suggests that the average current and optimal
utility steadily decrease during the simulation. This is due to the
increase in prices that is observed. The price stabiles after about
120 time steps, after which the utilities also stabilise.
With respect to the robustness of the proposed model, it is
noted that the model was tested extensively, by running it 100
times for the same base settings. These analyses indicated a large
stability in modelled results. For instance, the average predicted
price level was 2.21 with a standard deviation of 0.06. With respect
to convergence behaviour, we found that all 100 runs displayed
similar convergence behaviour. That is to say, the average change
in the price level is less than 0.1% over the last 10 time steps. Thus,
this empirical analysis indicates that the model is robust in the
sense of predicting the same outcome under similar inputs and
consistently converges into equilibrium.
4.2. Different vacancy rates
The results of scenarios with different vacancy rates are dis-
played in Table 2 , and reﬂect the effects of various mechanisms.
An important factor is the percentage households who turn down
an offered dwelling, in anticipation of a better offer. We ﬁnd that
this percentage is higher for higher vacancy rates (10–20%), since
more dwellings are available, and thus the probability of being of-
fered a better dwelling is large. However, also for a small vacancy
rate the %wait is high. Here it is the effect of a large difference be-
tween optimal and actual utility, due to a high price level. This
large difference may prompt households to turn down an offered
dwelling more easily. This effect has an impact on other character-
istics as well. The probability of selling a dwelling is lowest for very
high and very low vacancy rates, also reﬂected in the percentage
sold dwellings. The difference between actual and optimal utility
also seems to be determining the number of households searching
for a dwelling, which is highest in the high (20%) and low (2.5%)
vacancy scenarios. Nevertheless, the effect on the price level is as
expected: the lower the vacancy rate, the higher the price. This
suggests that the model predicts the price level as the result of
different (sometimes contradictory) mechanisms in a plausible
correct way. It should be noted, though, that the outcomes of the
simulation depend signiﬁcantly on the parameter settings. For in-
stance, the values for optimal and actual utility, following from
u1 and u2, highly determine the number of transactions in case
of high vacancy levels.
Finally, we point at the consistency that should exist between
the perceived probability of selling a dwelling and the share of va-
cant dwellings being sold. Table 2 suggests that the percentage
sold (%sold) and the perceived probability are in the same order
of magnitude and that differences between scenarios are consis-
tently reﬂected by both indices. This suggests that the Bayesian
perception updating mechanism provides sellers with efﬁcient
information.
4.3. Different risk taking proﬁles
As noted before, the list price is set by trading off the probability
of selling at the current, high price against the probability of having
to sell at a lower price at a later time. This trade-off also involves a
discount factor d2 (see Eq. (8)), representing the disutility of selling
at a later time, since this involves additional costs and uncertainty.
In the base scenario, the discount factor d is a stochastic variable
drawn from a uniform distribution with boundaries [0.93–1.00].
The stochastic character represents differences between house-
holds with respect to risk taking inclination. If we interpret the dis-
count factor as an indicator of risk aversiveness, more and less risk
aversive scenarios can be obtained by drawing from the uniform
distributions [0.96–1.00] and [0.88–1.00] respectively. Table 3 ,
representing the difference between different risk taking scenarios,
indicates that risk aversiveness does only have a small effect on
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1 21 41 61 81 101 121 141 161 181
time step
listprice (ref)
price (ref)
prob. sell
Fig. 3. Development of prices and probability of selling.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1
15
29
43
57
71
85
99
113
127
141
155
169
183
197
% wait
prob. offer
Fig. 4. Development of probability of receiving an optimal offer.
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
1 21 41 61 81 101 121 141 161 181
average utility
av. optimal utility
price
Fig. 5. Development of average and optimal utility.
D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11 9

average price levels in our model. In the high-risk scenario, sellers
are likely to ask higher prices, since the disutility of selling later is
smaller. As a result, list prices are higher, resulting in higher mar-
ket prices and lower utilities. In a similar vain, lower risk taking by
sellers results in lower list prices and slightly higher utilities. In
this case, the percentage of buyers not accepting an offered dwell-
ing is slightly higher, probably because the supply of attractive
dwellings is higher. It should be noted, however, that the effect
of risk aversiveness is much less than the effect of the vacancy rate.
4.4. Effect of threshold for searching
Table 2 suggests that if the threshold to start searching for a
dwelling is higher, slightly fewer households search for a dwelling,
as expected. As a result the actual and perceived probability of sell-
ing a dwelling are lower, resulting in lower list prices and lower
prices in general. The probability of being offered an attractive
dwelling is higher, leading to a larger percentage of offered dwell-
ings being turned down, is lower. Due to the lower prices the aver-
age and optimal utility is higher as compared to the base scenario.
5. Conclusions
This paper has described a multi-agent model of housing mar-
ket transactions and developments, such as price formation, over-
all utility and the total demand for dwellings. The proposed model
is an agent-based micro-simulation model, implying that aggre-
gate housing market characteristics are the outcome of (simulated)
decisions of households such as searching for a better dwelling,
engaging in negotiations, accepting an offer and setting a list price.
In this respect, the proposed model ﬁts in well with the structure of
more general multi-agent models of land use and transportation,
which are based on an individual representation of households
and dwellings.
An important property of the proposed model is that all deci-
sions leading to market clearance are based on households’ percep-
tions of market probabilities, such as the probability of selling at a
particular price or receiving an offer with a particular quality, and of
the overall market price level. These perceptions are updated, based
on the observed outcomes of bargaining processes. As a result, a dy-
namic model is obtained, in which relocation patterns and price set-
ting respond to characteristics of the housing market. This is an
important improvement over hedonic regression models, in which
prices are only dependent on characteristics of the dwelling as such.
Another important characteristic of the model is that the decision
to relocate is not only determined by of demographic and dwelling
characteristics, but also by developments on the housing market.
This is also an improvement over existing relocation models.
In contrast to some existing models of housing market pro-
cesses (e.g. Anas & Arnott, 1994 ), the model described in this pa-
per is not yet spatially explicit, in the sense that the spatial
location of the new dwelling, relative to the old residential loca-
tion and work locations, is not yet included in the model, and
prices and market probabilities are not speciﬁed for speciﬁc loca-
tions/regions. The speciﬁc contribution of this paper, however,
lies in the fully endogenous modelling of demand, supply and
price setting. Future work should improve the spatial representa-
tion of the current model. Most likely, this will involve the inclu-
sion of spatial variables (e.g. dummies for regions or accessibility
measures) in the probability functions (9) and (10) , and in the
utility function (1).
The proposed model was programmed and tested in a (non-spa-
tial) numerical example, to test how the model responds to differ-
ent housing market scenarios and behavioural assumptions. The
numerical examples suggest that the model responds in a realistic
way to changed market characteristics. In particular, if the vacancy
rate decreases (and supply is less) the prices of dwellings increase
because selling households set a higher list price, they are less likely
to lower their list price and buying household are more likely to ac-
cept an offer in absence of an alternative. However, the simulations
also suggest that with increasing prices the demand for dwellings
decreases, eventually leading to an equilibrium situation.
Given that the model leads to plausible results a number of
steps for further research can be identiﬁed. First, the behavioural
Table 2
Simulation results for different vacancy rates (100 runs).
Vacancy rate, 20% Vacancy rate, 10% Vacancy rate, 5% Vacancy rate, 2.5%
Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
UTIL 46.03 0.32 /C0 2.73 4.85 /C0 19.72 1.73 /C0 28.19 2.68
UOPT 55.87 0.34 0.30 5.29 /C0 12.99 1.25 /C0 19.18 1.94
Price 0.03 0.01 1.66 0.17 2.21 0.06 2.46 0.11
%wait 0.99 0.01 0.61 0.16 0.32 0.20 0.52 0.23
P0 s 0.00 0.00 0.45 0.05 0.36 0.02 0.33 0.03
Po 0.45 0.01 0.30 0.03 0.28 0.05 0.32 0.05
%sold 0.01 0.01 0.42 0.10 0.32 0.15 0.29 0.18
#search 470.21 6.72 299.78 34.30 400.85 16.94 461.75 19.87
#sold 0.80 0.86 24.96 6.25 9.74 4.62 4.28 2.70
Table 3
Simulation results for different risk taking proﬁles and search thresholds (100 runs).
d1 drawn from [0.96–1.00] d1 drawn from [0.88–1.00] Tn = 1.15
Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
UTIL /C0 20.93 2.01 /C0 13.06 1.51 /C0 19.53 1.77
UOPT /C0 13.83 1.39 /C0 8.23 1.19 /C0 12.86 1.25
Price 2.25 0.08 1.98 0.05 2.20 0.07
%wait 0.31 0.20 0.50 0.18 0.29 0.19
P0 s 0.34 0.03 0.47 0.01 0.36 0.02
P0 o 0.26 0.05 0.33 0.04 0.28 0.05
%sold 0.31 0.16 0.44 0.13 0.35 0.14
#search 413.33 16.10 349.32 17.32 400.01 14.92
#sold 9.34 4.86 13.26 3.83 10.39 4.05
10 D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11

mechanisms should be veriﬁed empirically, to determine the cor-
rect values of behavioural parameters. Second, the model should
be upscaled from the current 600 to over one million households
and dwellings, to facilitate the application in large-scale applica-
tions. Incorporating the current model in a full-ﬂedged LUTI model
involves various challenges. First, the housing market model needs
to be linked to an operational demographic simulation model,
describing household formation and dissolvation processes. It is
noted that the interaction between the two models can go two
ways: not only do demographic processes impact on the demand
for dwelling, the availability of dwellings also impacts on house-
hold formation. Second, the housing market module needs to be
linked to modules describing real estate development. For in-
stance, in response to an increased demand and higher prices,
developers may decide to add more dwellings of a particular type
to the available stock. The exact relationship between demand,
developers’ behaviour and government regulations is an important
topic for further research. Finally, the linkage with the transporta-
tion system is important. The residential location choice of house-
holds as well as development of new dwellings will affect travel
patterns, which will in turn affect accessibility of residential loca-
tions. The change in accessibility may then impact on households’
preferences for certain locations. This relationship, which is at the
heart of LUTI models, needs to be properly represented.
References
Anas, A., & Arnott, R. (1994). The Chicago prototype housing market model with
tenure choice and its policy applications. Journal of Housing Research, 5 , 23–90.
Arnott, R., Braid, R., Davidson, R., & Pines, D. (1999). A general equilibrium spatial
model of housing quality and quantity. Regional Science and Urban Economics,
29, 283–316.
Ben-Akiva, M. E., & Lerman, S. (1985). Discrete choice analysis . Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT-Press.
Benenson, I. (1998). Multi-agent simulations of residential dynamics in the city.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 22 , 25–42.
Ben-Shahar, D. (2002). Theoretical and empirical analysis of the multiperiod pricing
pattern in the real estate market. Journal of Housing Economics, 11 , 95–107.
Brown, L. A., & Moore, E. G. (1970). The intra-urban migration process: A
perspective. Geograﬁska Annaler, 52B , 1–13.
Clark, W. A. V., & Onaka, J. L. (1983). Life cycle and housing adjustment as
explanations of residential mobility. Urban Studies, 20 , 47–57.
Coles, M. G., & Muthoo, A. (2003). Bargaining in a non-stationary environment.
Journal of Economic Theory, 109 , 70–89.
Curlette, W. L. (2006). A framework for research studies: Mixed methods through
combining bayesian statistics and qualitative research in individual psychology.
Journal of Individual Psychology, 62 , 338–350.
Devisch, O. T. J., Timmermans, H. J. P., & Arentze, T. A. (2009). An agent-based model
of residential choice dynamics in nonstationary housing markets. Environment
and Planning A, 41 , 1997–2014.
Ettema, D., de Jong, K., Timmermans, H., & Bakema, A. (2006). PUMA: Multi-agent
modelling of urban systems. In E. Koomen, A. Bakema, J. Stillwell, & H. Scholten
(Eds.), Land use modeling . Springer.
Filatova, T., Parker, D., & van der Veen, A. (2009). Agent-based urban land markets:
Agent’s pricing behavior, land prices and urban land use change. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, 12 (13).
Lowry, I. S. (1963). Location parameters in the Pittsburgh model. Papers and
Proceedings of the Regional Science Association, 11 , 145–165.
Martinez, F., & Roy, J. (2004). A model for residential supply. Annals of Regional
Science, 38 , 531–550.
Miller, E. J., Hunt, J. D., Abraham, J. E., & Salvini, P. A. (2004). Microsimulating urban
systems. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 28 , 9–44.
Moeckel, R., Wegener, M., & Schwarze, B. (2005). Simulating land use change by
modelling persons, households and dwellings. In Paper presented at CUPUM
conference, London.
Nyarko, Y. (1997). Convergence in economic models with Bayesian hierarchies of
beliefs. Journal of Economic Theory, 74 , 266–299.
Parker, D. C., & Filatova, T. (2008). A conceptual design for a bilateral agent-based
land market with heterogeneous economic agents. Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems, 32 , 454–463.
Schinkel, M. P., Tuinstra, J., & Vermeulen, D. (2002). Convergence of Bayesian
learning to general equilibrium in mis-speciﬁed models. Journal of Mathematical
Economics, 38 , 483–508.
Timmermans, H. J. P. (2003). The saga of integrated land use-transport modeling:
How many more dreams before we wake up? In Paper presented at the 10th
international conference on travel behaviour research , Lucerne, 10–15 August,
2003.
Torrens, P. M. (2007). A geographic automata model of residential mobility.
Environment and Planning B, 34 , 200–222.
Tryfos, P. (1981). On the estimation of bid distributions in real estate markets.
Management Science, 27 , 587–601.
Turnbull, G. K., & Sirmans, C. F. (1993). Information, search, and house prices.
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 23 , 545–557.
Van der Vlist, A. J., Rietveld, P., & Nijkamp, P. (2002). Residential search and mobility
in a housing market equilibrium model. Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics, 24 , 277–299.
Waddell, P., Borning, A., Noth, M., Freier, N., Becke, M., & Ulfarsson, G. (2003).
Microsimulation of urban development and location choices: Design and
implementation of UrbanSim. Networks and Spatial Economics, 3 , 43–67.
Walker, J., & Li, J. (2006). Latent lifestyle preferences and household location
decisions. In Paper presented to IATBR conference , Kyoto.
Wegener, M. (1985). The Dortmund housing market model: A Monte Carlo
simulation of a regional housing market. In K. Stahl (Ed.). Microeconomic
models of housing markets. Lecture notes in economic and mathematical systems
(Vol. 239, pp. 144–191). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
D. Ettema / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 1–11 11
