Agent and system dynamics-based hybrid modeling and simulation
for multilateral bidding in electricity market
Jidong Wang, Jiahui Wu, Yanbo Che *
Key Laboratory of Smart Grid of Ministry of Education, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China
article info
Article history:
Received 22 December 2018
Received in revised form
23 March 2019
Accepted 25 April 2019
Available online 2 May 2019
Keywords:
Electricity market
Hybrid simulation
Reinforcement learning
abstract
The electricity industry consists of multiple parties on generation, transmission, distribution, trading and
market supervision of electricity. Models for a single electricity ﬁrm are only suitable for studying the
operational decisions of the particular ﬁrm. In order to study the bidding behavior of all the players in the
electricity market, this paper proposes a hybrid simulation model (HSM) that combines agent-based
simulation (ABS) and system dynamics simulation (SDS). With the proposed hybrid model, some input
variables required for one simulation model can be obtained by the output of another simulation model.
In order to improve the competitiveness of agents that participate in bidding, this paper incorporates the
Reinforce Learning (RL) algorithm into the agents. Each agent can obtain information and adapt to the
environment through the continuous interaction with the environment. With the hybrid simulation
model, the dynamics of the entire market remain stable, the market clearing prices converge, and the
market share is relatively uniform.
© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The 21st century is an era of energy, which is intimately related
to people's lives. Some technical problems and policy issues in the
power industry, such as macro-control measures, ef ﬁciency, and
resource optimization allotment of electronic market, need to be
resolved [1,2].
Many scholars use optimization methods to solve realistic and
optimization scheduling problems for hybrid power system. S.
Surender Reddy, A. R. Abhyankar and P. R. Bijwe [ 3] proposed
market clearing model for wind-thermal power system, including
uncertainties in wind power generation and load demand and
provides a compromise solution by optimizing the objectives using
multi-objective Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm. S. Sure-
nder Reddy and James A [ 4] proposed the optimal scheduling
strategy, taking into account the impact of uncertainties in wind,
solar photovoltaic and load forecasting, and this strategy consists of
a genetic algorithm (GA)-based scheduling and a two-point esti-
mate-based probabilistic real-time optimal power ﬂow. S. Surender
Reddy [ 5] proposed a new strategy for the optimal scheduling
problem taking into account the impact of uncertainties in wind,
solar photovoltaic and load forecasting. The simulation results with
Genetic Algorithm and Two-Point Estimate Method have been
applied to test the effectiveness of the proposed optimal scheduling
strategy. A multi-objective optimal power ﬂow (MOPF) model is
established to minimize three objective functions of bus loading
voltage deviations, network active power loss, pollution gas emis-
sions and meanwhile to satisfy the security constraints of power
transmission limits in lines (Shuwen Tan and Shunjiang Lin et al.
[6]). The previous Li-Ion battery charger techniques are reviewed
and compared and the new fuzzy logic battery charging method
which is proposed to optimize and improve the battery charger
efﬁciently (Asadi and Houshyar et al. [ 7]).
In addition, many scholars have studied various optimization
algorithms. Kaboli, S. Hr Aghay et al. [ 8,9] dealt with estimation of
electricity demand of Iran on the basis of economic criteria using a
genetic-based approach called Gene Expression Programming
(GEP) as an expression-driven approach, and arti ﬁcial cooperative
search algorithm as evolutionary algorithm. Kaboli and S. Hr Aghay
et al. [ 10,11] proposed rainfall optimization algorithm (RFO) as a
new nature-inspired algorithm and the optimized GEP (gene
expression programming) was applied to precisely formulate the
relationships between historical data and electricity consumption.
A GEP-based model for the ﬁrst time was proposed as a safe and
accurate method to predict the adhesion strength and hardness of
material (Ra ﬁeerad, A. R., et al., [ 12]). The obtained adhesion* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: lab538@163.com (Y. Che).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/energy
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.04.180
0360-5442/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456

strength and hardness of material were modeled by particle swarm
optimization (PSO) to predict the outputs performance. (Ra ﬁeerad
A. R. et al., [ 13]). Modiri Delshad and Mostafa et al. [ 14] present
backtracking search algorithm (BSA) as an evolutionary technique
for solving economic dispatch (ED) problems with considering
valve-point loading effects, prohibited operating zones, and mul-
tiple fuel options. A meta-heuristic method is integrated with the
control system in order to find the optimum coefficients values in a
single multimodal problem (S.S. Sebtahmadi and H. Borhan Azad
et al., [ 15]).
In fact, because most systems are complex nonlinear systems,
modeling and simulation have become the primary methods for
studying and solving these nonlinear problems. Compared to the
optimization method that provides the best solution, simulation is
a viable solution that can be closer to reality.
Modeling and simulation, which are effective methods to solve
complex system problems, include several popular methods like
cellular automata, agent-based simulation (ABS) and system dy-
namics simulation (SDS). The three methods are different and the
solutions are different either. ABS and SDS modeling approaches
take fundamentally different perspectives to model a system,
which can be characterized as bottom-up (ABS) versus top-down
(SDS) [ 16]. SDS abstracts from single events and entities and
takes an aggregate view concentrating on policies, to describe the
system behavior as a number of interacting feedback loops,
balancing or reinforcing. ABS de ﬁnes behavior at individual level
and global behavior emerges as a result of many individuals, each
following its own behavior rules, living together in some environ-
ment and communication with each other and with environment.
As a complex system, the modeling and simulation methods on
ABS and SDS are very suitable for the power market. Fang Shen [ 17]
focused on the future development of computer simulation tech-
nology. According to different market participants, Jiadao Li et al.
[18] put forward different market simulation models and corre-
sponding simulation goals and strategies. The intelligent agent
technology of simulating the quotation behavior of power market
was studied. The learning algorithms such as Roth-Erve algorithm
and Q-learning algorithm were improved in parameter setting,
strategy space generation and convergence, and the corresponding
mathematical model is established [ 19]. A complete design method
of power market simulation experiment and a market evaluation
index for evaluating simulation results were presented [ 20]. The
system dynamics method was used to study the power market
operation system and divide it into four subsystems: production,
transmission, trading and supervision [ 21]. Dan Liu, Jiantong Cao
and Jianming Chen [22] summarized the application of agent-based
modeling method in the study of macroeconomics and microen-
terprise management, and evaluated its advantages and disad-
vantages. A simpli ﬁed model of market competition was
established, corresponding simulation parameters were designed,
and the dynamic competition behavior and evolution process of
retailers were simulated by Swarm simulation platform (Qing Zhou,
Yingying Huang and Chen Jian, [ 23]. Integration of several elec-
tricity market and power system models was given respecting to
the reality of different countries. (Gabriel Santos etc., [24]. Francisco
Silva et al. [ 25] analyse the way players' characteristics are
modeled, particularly in their representation in a smaller scale,
simplifying the simulation while maintaining the quality of results,
and comparing real electricity market values with the market re-
sults achieved using the generated scenarios.
A single modeling method cannot completely and accurately
reveal the behavior of complex systems. Therefore, hybrid
modeling and simulation methods have become new trend in the
study of complexity problems. Hybrid simulation method
combining ABS with SDS models is a useful and promising
approach to model systems. Many scholars argue that the choice of
an appropriate modeling approach to adopt in a particular case
should be depended on the nature of the system at hand and the
purpose of the model. Gudrun Wallentina and Christian Neuwirth
[26] proposed a framework for adaptive and reversible switching
between hybrid AB-SD model designs. To demonstrate the
approach, they implemented six dynamic hybrid models for a
predator-prey model of ﬁsh and plankton. Swinerd and McNaught
[27] suggested that many systems can be modeled in equivalent
ways by both paradigms. They present three basic types of hybrid
agent-based system dynamics simulations, referred to here as
interfaced, integrated and sequential hybrid designs. Vincenot et al.
[16] studied that ABS is preferred for modeling real-life systems
consist of subsystems with “ divisible entities' such as population
made of individuals, whereas SDS modeling is more adequate for
real-life systems with ‘whole entities ’. J.H. Lewe, L.F. Hivin, D.N.
Mavris [ 28] studied combination ABS of the intercity travel to
identify the governing equations with the structure of a top down
SDS model. Lauri L €attil€a, Per Hilletofth, and Bishan Lin [ 29]h a v e
found ﬁve different situations where it will be useful to combine
these methods such as ABS and SD. An integrated approach of
agent-based modeling, system dynamics and discrete event simu-
lation was adopted to complement the standard lifecycle assess-
ment methodology (Bochao Wang, S /C19everin Br^eme, Young B. Moon,
[30]. Charles M. Macal [ 31] present a formal speci ﬁcation for SDS
and ABS models, use the speci ﬁcation to derive equivalent ABS
representations, and present an example of an epidemic model.
The overall operation of the electricity market includes the
generation, transmission, distribution, trading process of the po-
wer, the market supervision and so on. The multilateral bidding of
the electricity market is an overall bidding process involving a
number of aspects. The single modeling method is limited to
explore some of the issues of the multilateral bidding in the elec-
tricity market, which is impossible to completely reveal the overall
multilateral bidding in the electricity market. The motivation of this
paper is as follows: hybrid simulation method (HSM) is proposed
for multilateral bidding of the electricity market, which is based on
the agent-based simulation (ABS) and the system dynamics simu-
lation (SDS) in order to simulation the overall multilateral bidding
in the electricity market.
Considering of the multivariable in real situations, this paper
adopts a hybrid modeling method based on ABS and SDS, by which
the operation of electricity market is modeled macroscopically to
observe the overall changes of the system. In order to better
simulate the trading conditions of the real time electricity market,
agent-based modeling is applied to the bidding transactions. These
two modeling processes are related to each other. With the real-
time feedback changes of relevant variables, the results are pre-
sented accordingly, thus simulating the multilateral bidding pro-
cess of the electricity market.
The contribution of this paper is as follows: 1) This paper studies
agent-based electricity market bidding simulation method, estab-
lishes agent-based electricity market bidding simulation model,
and simulates electricity market bidding process; 2) This paper
studies the modeling and simulation method of the overall oper-
ation of the electricity market based on system dynamics, estab-
lishes a system dynamic simulation model of electricity market
whole operation system, and realizes the re ﬁned analysis of elec-
tricity market system; 3) The hybrid modeling and simulation
method based on agent and system dynamics is studied, and a
hybrid simulation model based on electricity market operation is
established. By running the hybrid simulation model, we can ﬁnd
that the market competition is not fully re ﬂected by the single
market regulation of the clearance price.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456 445

2. Simulation variables and parameters
2.1. Variables and parameters of ABS
This paper proposes an agent-based model to simulate gov-
ernment regulation in the electricity market, bidding between
power plants, clearing of trading centers and competition between
power grid companies and customers and so on. As shown in Fig. 1,
the whole agents are classi ﬁed into ﬁve major categories, including
a trading center agent; a government agent; a grid company agent;
1000 consumer agents; four power plant agents, which include two
thermal power plant agents, a hydropower plant agent and a wind
power plant agent. The trading center separately reports the
amount of clearing to each power plant. To raise clearing quantity
and make it close to their maximum power supply, the power plant
agents can adjust the bidding strategy by applying learning algo-
rithm. Through monitoring the learning effect of power plant
agents, the government agent will calculate the social welfare,
which is under different contract power ratios, till the amount of
clearing tends to remain stable, that is, the supply and demand
balanced, ﬁnally to seek the proportion of the contracted power
under the maximized social welfare. The grid company agent will
formulate a power purchase plan for each round of clearing ac-
cording to its own demand function after each clearing. Some
consumer agents can purchase electricity directly from the trading
center, or purchase electricity from the grid company subsequently.
Various variables, parameters and events need to be added to
the model, In order to automate the agent. What Table 1 describes
is the basic parameters of the power plant agents.
2.2. Variables and parameters of SDS
System dynamics method is of great signi ﬁcance in the eco-
nomic ﬁeld, and can also be applied to the general study of the
electricity market. The system dynamics method simulates the
behavior of complex systems qualitatively from a rather macro-
scopic perspective by establishing several cycles to achieve mutual
feedback among the various parts of the system.
In system dynamics model, the complex electricity market
system is divided into four subsystems: generation subsystem,
transmission subsystem, transaction subsystem and supervision
subsystem. Four sub-cycles are established to simulate the four
linkages of production, transaction, transmission and supervision
in real electricity market. Specifying the function of each subsys-
tem, Depicting the causality among them, and furthermore, driving
the whole system normally, which in the end can be described as
the electricity market ¼ {subsystems, (subsystem internal re-
lations), (subsystem external relations)}. By establishing the link-
ages among the subsystems, the electricity market is simulated,
thus laying the foundation for the management of the whole
electricity market (Forrester J W, [ 32]). The principle indexes are
shown in Table 2.
3. Trading mechanism and bidding strategy of electricity
market
3.1. Trading mechanism of electricity market
After the trading center announced the demand for electricity,
the power plants submitted the quotation curve for each time
period to the trading center (the quotation curve is a segmentation
curve). The trading center matches the supply curve with the de-
mand curve to calculate the market clearing price and clearing
power. As a dynamic system, the power system's load curve is
constantly changing. To simplify the load model, we discretize the
time and divide the day into 48 time periods so that the load re-
mains constant for each time period. Both the cost curve and the
quotation curve of the power plant are piecewise functions, as
Fig. 1. Rules for the multilateral bidding model of the electricity market.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456446

shown in Figs. 2 and 3. Thus, the bidding curve for each power plant
is also segmented.
3.2. Bidding strategy of power plants
This paper selects the three-stage linear function as the quota-
tion curve for all time periods, and uses the discrete quadratic
polynomial to generate the bidding strategy space of the power
plants. The cost curve of the power plants can be expressed as
follows (Formula (1)):
cðqÞ¼
8
<
:
c1; Qmin /C20 q < Q1
c2; Q1 /C20 q < Q2
c3; Q2 /C20 q < Qmax
(1)
Q min, Q max represent the minimum output and maximum output
of the power plant respectively.
The quotation curve and the cost curve use the same segmen-
tation to reduce the number of parameters. The quotation curve is
shown in Formula (2).
bðqÞ ¼
8
<
:
p1; q0 /C20 q < q1
p2; q1 /C20 q < q2
p3; q2 /C20 q < q3
(2)
We ﬁrst construct a quadratic polynomial to determine the
formula of the quote. Therefore, we need to generate P1, P2 and P3
in each quotation strategy, which correspond to Qmin (minimum
output), Qmid (median output) and (maximum output), respec-
tively, and Qmid is the arithmetic mean of Qmin and Qmax.
q
0
¼ q /C0 Qmin； qd ¼ Qmax /C0 Qmin (3)
The functional relationship between p and q' is shown in
Equation (4),
p ¼ aq02 þ bq
0
þ c (4)
Then the following formula can be derived,
8
<
:
p1 ¼ c
p2 ¼ 0:25aq2
d þ 0:5bqd þ c
p3 ¼ aq2
d þ bqd þ c
(5)
Formula (6) can be derived from equation (5),
8
<
: a ¼ 2ðp1 þ p3 /C0 2p2Þ
.
q2
db ¼ð 4p2 /C0 3p1 /C0 p3Þ = qdc ¼ p1 (6)
From equation (6), the quotation formula is determined as long
Table 1
Basic parameters of power plant agents.
Thermal power
plant1
Thermal power
plant2
Hydropower
plant1
power
plant1
Maximum output 80 120 120 132
Minimum output 40 60 60 66
Highest price 0.16 0.15 0.14 0.14
Lowest price 0.11 0.12 0.08 0.09
Intermediate price 0.14 0.13 0.12 0.11
Cost [0.04,0.05,0.06] [0.06,0.08,0.1] [0.06,0.08,0.1] [0.07,0.08,0.09]
Capacity segment [40,55,65,80] [60,80,100,120] [60,80,100,120] [66,88,110,132]
Table 2
Main indicators of electricity market.
Main
indicators
Capacity
retention ratio
Generation pro ﬁt
margin
Power
generation cost
clearing
price
abbreviation CWR GP GMC CP
initial value 0.2 0 0.05 0.12
Main
indicators
Electricity
consumption
declaration
Declaration of
supply and
demand ratio
Concentration
of declared
electricity
Power
generation
declaration
abbreviation DRC SDR HHI SRC
initial value 250 0 0.25 452
Fig. 2. Power plant cost curve.
Fig. 3. Power plant quotation curve (three quotations).
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456 447

as the lowest price, the highest price and the number of quotes are
generated. Taking the ﬁrst power plant in the model as an example,
if the lowest price is 0.1 1, the highest price is 0.16, the number of
quotes is 3, and the possible prices are 0.1 1, 0.14 and 0.16. As the
price rises, there are 10 strategies M ¼ 1 þ 3þ6 ¼ 10: [0.1 1,0.1 1,0.1 1],
[0.1 1,0.1 1,0.14], [0.1 1,0.1 1,0.16], [0.1 1,0.14,0.14], [0.1 1,0.14,0.16],
[0.1 1,0.16,0.16], [0.14,0.14,0.14], [0.14,0.14, 0.16], [0.14,0.16,0.16],
[0.16,0.16,0.16].
3.3. Market clearing strategy of trading center
The trading center adopts the uni ﬁed price clearing mode
(MCP). In the MCP mode, all power plants sell electricity at the
same price, and all power purchasers also buy at the same price.
The trading center's trading cycle is 15 days, and the lowest price
that can meet the power demand is the uni ﬁed trading price of the
market. In this paper, the queuing method with fast speed, simple
algorithm and high stability is selected for liquidation. Before each
transaction, the trading center will collect the quotation curve
submitted by each power plant. The basic process is as follows:
1) Sort the quotations of each power plant from low to high and
give the serial number. When the quotations are the same, the
one with the smaller declared electricity value is given priority.
2) Accumulate the declared power values of each power plant one
by one in order, until the value can cover the load.
3) The quotations corresponding to the current serial number is
the uniﬁed clearing price, and the current liquidation quantity of
each power plant can be calculated according to the load de-
mand. After the clearing price and the liquidation amount are
obtained, the remaining power is evenly distributed to the
respective power plants based on the calculated demand sur-
plus, thereby obtaining the ﬁnal clear amount of each power
plant.
In the process of market liquidation, there are some phenomena
that hinder the normalization of liquidation, and it requires manual
intervention. Therefore, this paper adds a dynamic queuing method
based on the common queuing method, and changes the queuing
mode under the constraint conditions, solves some problems that
cannot be eliminated, and improves the ef ﬁciency.
3.4. Purchasing strategy of grid company and users
If the grid company's demand value exceeds the current total
electricity value of the transaction, the grid company will purchase
all the outputs and give the words “ supply less than demand ” .
The user purchases electricity is divided into two forms: some
large users purchase electricity directly from the trading center and
buy electricity from power grid company. The portion that has not
been purchased by power grid company will be purchased by some
large users. Users preferred to purchase electricity from the trading
center, followed by power grid company. In addition, the portion
purchased directly from the trading center is charged to the power
grid company for transmission according to the amount of
electricity.
4. Simulation of multilateral bidding in electricity market
4.1. Agent reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning is a kind of machine learning. Agents
can acquire knowledge and adapt to the environment through the
continuous interaction with the environment. Through agent
learning, the agent's competitive ability is improved, and it is more
conducive to realizing multi-party dynamic game bidding. There
are many choices about agent learning algorithm. This paper
chooses the Roth-Erev (RE) algorithm based on improved rein-
forcement learning. In the ﬁnite game with incomplete informa-
tion, the algorithm seeks equilibrium through the ﬁnite game
strategy. It is an adaptive learning algorithm. This algorithm is used
to simulate the bidding strategy selection process of power plants
in the incomplete information market. In electricity market simu-
lation, the learning steps of power plant agent are as follows:
(1) Using random generators (0, 1) to generate random numbers
as the initial tendency coef ﬁcient of each bidding strategy.
(2) Use the formula and the propensity coef ﬁcient of each
strategy to calculate the selection probability.
(3) Implement liquidation in accordance with the electricity
market rules.
(4) Each agent calculates its respective output and pro ﬁts based
on market clearing results.
(5) Use the formula to modify the propensity coef ﬁcients in the
policy space.
(6) If it is not ﬁnished, return to the second step, or else it will
end.
First, we must determine the propensity coef ﬁcient, with the
following updated formula (Eq. (7)):
8
<
:
Qt ðiÞ¼ð 1 /C0 rÞ * Qt/C0 1ðiÞþð 1 /C0 eÞ * Rt/C0 1 ðif i ¼ numÞ
Qt ðiÞ¼ð 1 /C0 rÞ * Qt/C0 1ðiÞþ eQt/C0 1ðiÞ
M ðif i s numÞ
(7)
In Equation (7), t represents the number of market clearings,
num represents the number of selected strategies, and M repre-
sents the total number of strategies, taking 10. Both formulas
indicate the propensity coefﬁcient of i-th strategy being selected at
time t. The value of the bonus value R is taken from the pro ﬁt that
the agent obtains from the market in each clearing. r is a forgetting
factor, so each behavior does not accumulate over time, reducing
the impact of historical experience on the outcome and making the
new strategy competitive. e is an empirical parameter that en-
courages agents to generate different bidding strategies in the early
stages of learning.
For the calculation of the probability of strategy, the following
formula is used:
pt ðaÞ¼ expðQt ðiÞ=cÞ
PM
j¼1expðQt ðiÞ=cÞ
(8)
c is the cooling coef ﬁcient, which has a certain in ﬂuence on the
selection probability of the propensity coefﬁcient. The choice of the
value of c will affect the convergence of the model. If the value of c
is ﬁxed, the propensity coef ﬁcient for a strategy will increase with
the experiment, so it will suddenly converge without regularity.
Therefore, the dynamic adjustment method can be used to adjust
the propensity coef ﬁcient for each round.
ct ¼ k
M
X
i
Qt ðiÞ (9)
In the above formula, k is a real number greater than zero, and
its value will have a certain impact on the model, which will be
discussed in the simulation results.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456448

4.2. Simulation of multilateral bidding in electricity market based
on agent
4.2.1. Power plant agent
Each power plant agent uses reinforcement learning RE algo-
rithm to change bidding strategy. There are the following processes
in a clearing cycle:
(1) The Trading Center announces demand.
(2) Each power plant submits its own quotation.
(3) The Trading Center receives the quotation information and
calculates the clearing price and the clearing quantity of each
power plant by the clearing algorithm.
(4) The Trading Center releases the results and the power plants
get their own information.
(5) The power plants calculate the pro ﬁt, change the bidding
strategy, and prepare the next round of quotations.
We write code for the power plant agents. The ﬁrst event con-
taining the initialization algorithm is triggered during the initial
operation. The initialization process includes initial setting of bid-
ding strategy, capacity segment setting, cost setting, etc. The initial
bidding strategy number is generated by random number; the
second event-driven policy update is triggered for the ﬁrst time on
the ﬁfth day, and the update period is 15 days. The RE algorithm is
used to calculate the pro ﬁt of each current strategy as an important
reference for updating the next strategy.
4.2.2. Trading center agent
The Trading Center agent completes market clearing by writing
code in the event. The ﬁrst event is triggered on the ﬁrst day with
an update period of 15 days to collect the bid strategy proposed by
each power plant and record it in three array variables: price, ca-
pacity segment and queue number. The second event is triggered
on the second day, with an update period of 15 days, sorting the
quotations from low to high. The sorting method is bubble sorting.
After sorting, the quotation value is accumulated one by one until it
exceeds the load value, and the current offer is selected as the
uniﬁed clearing price. Finally, a margin is allocated for each power
plant based on the total load distribution.
4.2.3. Government agent
With the use of the learning algorithm, the power plant agent
adjusts the bidding strategy through continuous learning. After
about 400 rounds of liquidation, the total power supply of the
power plant agent and the market demand of the user agent
eventually tend to a stable value, that is, after the liquidation results
converge, the government agent will give the word “supply and
demand balance” and then start to adjust it. The contract electricity
ratio V calculates the social welfare situation since then. The
established model is initially a totally free competitive market, with
a contract power ratio of V of 0. When the model converges, the
government adjusts the contract electricity ratio by 0.05 step after
each clearance. At the same time, the government observes the
social welfare situation under different contract electricity ratio to
seek the contract electricity situation under the maximum social
welfare. Social welfare consists of producer surplus and consumer
surplus (Eq. (10)):
Welfare ¼ a /C3
 X3
i¼0
clearprice/C3
X3
i¼0
clearence /C0 SRC/C3
X3
i¼0
cost
!
þ b/C3ð Pd /C0 clearpriceÞ/C3
X3
i¼0
clearance
(10)
The social welfare value here is only used for relative compari-
son, and has no real meaning. Among them, a and b are the market
demand function coef ﬁcients, and Pd is derived from the market
supply and demand function according to the market real time
demand.
4.2.4. Power grid company and user agent
This paper refers to (Liu Zhen et al., [ 33]) and ﬁrst determines
the power demand function of the grid company. The grid com-
pany's demand for electricity is inversely related to the liquidation
price. We use EViews (the econometrics software is a statistical
package for Windows, mainly for time-series-based econometric
analysis) to determine the demand function of the grid company
agent (Eq. (1 1))
volume ¼ 290:65 /C0 181:8/C3 clearprice (11)
Whenever a large user purchases electricity directly, the system
will give the term “large direct purchase of electricity ” to distin-
guish the power purchased by the user from the grid company and
the trading center.
Fig. 4. Electricity market bidding simulation operation of agent.
Table 3
Multiple experiments with a load of 250.
Number of times Number of rounds Period 1 price
1 52 0.13
2 61 0.13
3 112 0.13
4 74 0.14
5 80 0.12
6 194 0.14
7 101 0.11
8 58 0.11
9 82 0.14
10 137 0.14
AVE 95.1 0.129
SD 43.58759 0.01197
S% 45.8334 9.2791
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456 449

4.2.5. Agent based simulation model validation
Many different developments have been going on under the
slogan of agent based modeling in very different disciplines like
artiﬁcial intelligence, complexity science, game theory, etc.(Schiritz
and Grosler [34]). In this paper, it is assumed that there are 4 power
plant agents and 1 trading center agent. Market quotation and
market clearing are conducted every 15 days. Finally, the uni ﬁed
clearing price is adopted, and the trading center feeds back the
respective clearing quantity of each power plant. Power plant agent
can change bidding strategy by learning algorithm. Fig. 4 shows the
ﬁnal operation of the model. There are four power plants and a
trading center in the left and two charts in the right. In the chart
below, the green and brown curves respectively represent the
highest and lowest prices in each round of bidding. As the bidding
time increases, the highest price and the lowest price will even-
tually stabilize at a price and form a stable market situation, which
is in line with the actual situation.
In order to validate the effect of the initial random number on
strategy selection and ﬁnal clearing price, multiple sets of simula-
tion experiments were performed and the results are listed in
Tables 3 and 4 .
In Tables 3 and 4, the number of rounds indicates the number of
clearing rounds when the clearing price converges, the number of
times indicates the number of simulated experiments, AVE repre-
sents the average value, SD represents the standard deviation, and S
% represents the ratio of AVE to SD. The results of each experiment
vary greatly, and it can be seen that the initial random number has a
certain in ﬂuence on the strategy selection. Therefore, after many
experiments, a valid conclusion can be obtained. As shown in
Table 5, as the number of times increases to 10, the difference be-
tween each clearing price has become very small. That is to say,
with the increase of the number of experiments, the difference
between each clearing price will also be reduced.
Through the simulation of the agent-based power market bid-
ding process, we have reached the conclusion that the initial values
of important parameters cannot be arbitrarily set and need to be
corrected by multiple simulations. Therefore, the rationality of the
agent-based modeling method is validation.
4.3. Electricity market simulation based on system dynamics
4.3.1. System dynamics based simulation model
We choose SRC, DRC and CP as state variables, representing
three subsystems of production, transmission and transaction
respectively. The supervision subsystem evaluates the total degree
of market competition by observing HHI. In the transmission sub-
system, the demand and competition of the electricity market will
determine the declared electricity of the purchaser, which is posi-
tively related; in the production subsystem, the demand for elec-
tricity will affect the supply situation and react to the demand for
electricity to a certain extent; in the transaction subsystem, when
the supply exceeds the demand, the clearing price will be lowered.
In the regulatory subsystem, HHI as an adjustable variable can
simulate the process of market competition from complete
competition to incomplete competition to observe the changes of
other indicators in the whole electricity market. In addition, each
subsystem will interact with each other, for example, when the
clearing price changes, it will affect the proﬁts of power plants, each
wind power plant will change the declared electricity accordingly,
further changing the electricity demand of the entire market.
Fig. 5 qualitatively represents the interaction of the various in-
dicators. Table 6 represents system ﬂow chart commonly used
parameter settings, the following equations are used to express the
quantitative relationships between the various parts.
dSRC = dt ¼ SRCR (12)
dDRC = dt ¼ DRCR (13)
dCP = dt ¼ CPR (14)
SRCR ¼ a*ð1 /C0 SDRÞ*SRC*HHI þ b*GP þ c (15)
DRCR ¼ d*ðSDR /C0 1Þ*DRC*HHI þ e*CP þ f (16)
CPR ¼ g*ð1 /C0 SDRÞ*CP þ h*CWR (17)
GP ¼ CP=GMC /C0 1 (18)
SDR ¼ SRC=DRC (19)
In the above equation, equation (12) ~ (14) is the equation of
state, equation (15) ~ (17) is the rate equation, and equation
(18) ~ (19) is the auxiliary equation. The above equations are the
core of the electricity market operation model, and the basic
framework of the system is preliminarily determined. Through a
number of simulation experiments in Anylogic, the unknown pa-
rameters of each equation are ﬁnally determined, which reﬂects the
relationship between all links in the electricity market as a whole
and further improves the model. The operation of the whole model
can be observed by changing the parameters.
4.3.2. System dynamics based simulation model validation
System dynamics (SD) developed by Jay W. Forrester in the
1950s. System dynamics is “the study of information-feedback
characteristics of industrial activity to show how organizational
structural, ampliﬁcation (in policies), and time delays (in decisions
and actions) interact to in ﬂuence the success of the enterprise ”
(Forrester [ 35,36]). The range of SD applications includes urban,
Table 4
Multiple experiments with a load of 250.
Number of times Number of rounds Period 1 price
1 38 0.14
2 133 0.15
3 30 0.14
4 48 0.14
5 161 0.14
6 86 0.14
7 40 0.14
8 205 0.14
9 121 0.14
10 36 0.14
AVE 89.800 0.141
SD 61.98172 0.00316
S% 69.0281 2.2411
Table 5
Average clearing results of multiple experiments.
Number of times 1 5 10
1 0.12 0.116 0.122
2 0.12 0.12 0.124
3 0.14 0.128 0.128
4 0.11 0.128 0.129
5 0.14 0.122 0.125
AVE 0.126 0.1228 0.1256
SD 0.013416 0.005215 0.002881
S% 10.6479 4.247 2.2938
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456450

social, ecological types of system.
Fig. 6 is the Anylogic software interface for dynamic operation of
the electricity market based on system dynamics. The initial
amounts of SRC and DRC were set to 452 and 250, respectively, and
CP was 0.12. At this time, the supply is larger than the demand. As
the clearing price CP continues to decrease, the declared power of
the power plant will also decrease, and the demand of the power
purchaser will continue to increase as the price decreases. Fig. 7
shows the supply and demand curve. The green curve represents
the supply and the brown curve represents the demand. We can see
that the curve changes very quickly at the beginning, but after 300
time units, the speed of change becomes slower and then stabilizes,
so we suppose that the supply and demand curve is convergent
under ideal conditions.
As shown in Figs. 8 and 9 , the red curve represents the market
clearing price and the blue curve represents the average market
clearing price. As the CWR value increases, the market price reacts
responsively, rises rapidly, and then stabilizes. Conversely, when
market prices fall, it falls rapidly. However, CWR has little impact on
market supply and demand. Since CWR reﬂects the degree of power
supply control of the power plant, when the value of CWR becomes
larger, the power plant will increase the price of electricity.
Conversely, the price of electricity will be affected by other factors
in the market, resulting in lower electricity prices. Therefore, the
impact of CWR on market operations is in line with the actual
situation.
As shown in Figs. 10 and 1 1, when HHI increases, the market
price rises slowly. When HHI drops to 0.25, the market price will fall
and then remain stable. When the HHI is 0.25, the four power
plants account for the same market share, indicating that the
market is fully competitive. When the HHI rises, the market supply
and demand curve will approach quickly, and the average clearing
price will rise rapidly. On the contrary, the market supply and de-
mand curve will rise slowly, and the average clearing price will
remain stable. It can be seen that when there are four power plants,
the closer the HHI value is to 0.25, the more intense the market
competition; when the HHI value is close to 1, the market will
become a completely monopolistic market. When the market be-
comes a completely monopolistic market, supply, demand and
price will be controlled, which is not conducive to the management
of market regulators.
As shown in Fig. 12, as the value of GMC increases, the market
clearing price will increase slowly, the market demand will shrink,
and then the clearing price will gradually decline and eventually
remain stable. As shown in Fig. 13 , when the value of GMC in-
creases, the market supply will decrease, but there is no impact on
market demand. When the value of GMC decreases, market supply
will increase slowly, but demand is not affected. It can be seen that
Fig. 5. Power ﬂow diagram of electricity market.
Table 6
Common parameter settings for system ﬂow diagrams.
Constant Value a b c d e f g h
Set Value 4 0.001 0 8 /C2 10¡4 0.001 0 0.01 0
Fig. 6. Interface model of electricity market based on system dynamics.
Fig. 7. Supply and demand relationship of electricity market model.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456 451

the cost has a great impact on the seller and will also change the
market clearing price and supply situation. Therefore, this simu-
lation experiment not only helps the power plant to control its
marginal cost, but also facilitates the overall operation.
It is of great guiding signi ﬁcance to observe the behavior of
electricity market from the perspective of system dynamics and
macro. The overall operation of the electricity market was simu-
lated by using system dynamics. However, the overall operation of
the system dynamics could not highlight the individual role. For the
trading link in the electricity market operation, the agent-based
Fig. 8. Inﬂuence of CWR on electricity market price.
Fig. 9. Inﬂuence of CWR on supply and demand of electricity market.
Fig. 10. Inﬂuence of HHI on electricity market price.
Fig. 1 1. Inﬂuence of HHI on supply and demand of electricity market.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456452

modeling and simulation method was used in the next section to
strengthen the role of the trading link and realize a bidding model.
5. Mixed simulation process of multilateral bidding in
electricity market
In the electricity market model, the agents simulated the bid-
ding process, which is the interactive process of dynamic infor-
mation in the system. After correlating with the system dynamics
model, in each clearing cycle, the system dynamics model contin-
uously receives real-time information from each agent in the
electricity market and adjusts the indicators. After the dynamic
variables are introduced to the agents, the real-time updated
declared power values are fed back to each power plant and affect
their bidding strategy. In turn, changes in supply and demand in
large markets will ultimately have an impact on the outcome of the
tender.
When CP and HHI are associated, the ﬁrst event is added to the
system dynamics model and is triggered for the ﬁrst time on the
third day with a trigger period of 15 days. The event assigns the
current clearing price to the CP in real time, calculates the HHI value
and updates it, and feeds the ﬁnal CP value back to each power
plant.
After the power demand and power costs are announced, the
second event will allocate the SRC changes to each wind farm ac-
cording to the market share of each power plant. Each wind farm
adjusts its bidding capacity segment accordingly. The bid price and
the bidding price have changed. After each market clearing, GMC
will adjust the maximum cost of each power plant as the ﬁnal cost.
The load of the trading center will be adjusted according to
market supply and demand. It will feed back to the agent model
each time the market clears, which in turn affects the bidding
Fig. 12. Inﬂuence of GMC on electricity market price.
Fig. 13. Inﬂuence of GMC on supply and demand of electricity market.
Fig. 14. The interface and results of the ﬁnal hybrid simulation.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456 453

process and brings the agent bid model closer to the market.
We set the experimental time parameters to record the current
market clearances and calculate the current average clearing price.
The parameters b and ab are set in a power plant agent. When each
bidding strategy is updated, the value of b is automatically
increased by one, which can be used to record the number of
market clearings. The parameter a represents the cumulative
clearing price, and the parameter ab is the ratio of the parameter a
to the parameter b, indicating the current average clearing price.
Equation (20) is an update formula for b, where I is the number of
selectable strategies for the factory and Pi is the probability when
strategy I is selected.
bt ¼ bt/C0 1 þ
Xi
i¼0
Pi (20)
6. Results and discussion
The given example model implements a very simple load
management algorithm to show feasibility of the simulation model
by Anylogic (Kremers E, Durana J G D, Barambones O, [ 37]. Anylogic
software is used in this paper to perform hybrid modeling based on
agent and system dynamics. Modeling connotation of agent part in
Anylogic is to enable agents to interact with each other through
information transfer. In system dynamics part, inventory and ﬂow
macro-control the variables, helping to study the complex adaptive
system composed of multiple behaviors. Task settings such as
setting the event and writing simple Java code in Anylogic
modeling so as to run the model is of great signi ﬁcance essentially.
The ﬁnal result of the hybrid simulation is shown in Fig. 14.
The ﬁnal result is presented in three parts: market clearing re-
sults, social welfare values and HHI values. Fig. 15shows the market
clearing result. Its abscissa is the number of market clearing, the
vertical axis is SRC, DRC, the market clearing of four power plants,
the electricity purchased by the grid company, and the power
purchased by large users. It can be seen that when the model runs
for a long time, the clearing price and the clearing power will
eventually converge, and the market supply and demand will also
converge. When the initial value of the model is changed, due to the
inﬂuence of the initial random number, the market clearing price
will show different changes in multiple simulations, but the results
are the same as above. Due to the use of the reinforcement learning
algorithm, random cases different from the results presented in
Fig. 15 may occur in each simulation experiment.
The clearing price and the average clearing price are shown in
Fig. 16. It can be seen that the bidding process of the agent model is
irregular, but it will converge to some similar values. Through the
process of agent learning after the market clears out, the market
clearing electricity price will be closer to the clearing price average.
As shown in Fig. 17, after more than 300 market clearings, the
effect of the agent's reinforcement learning is gradually stabilized.
At this time, the government began to raise the tax rate. Observing
the value of social welfare, we can ﬁnd that when the market is
most competitive (ie HHI ¼ 0.25), the value of social welfare is not
the highest. Thus, proper market competition and an appropriate
proportion of contract power will maximize the value of social
welfare (social welfare value is relative value, and its value does not
have actual reference value).
In addition, HHI is of great signi ﬁcance in simulation experi-
ments, and it is an important indicator to re ﬂect whether the
market is fully competitive. The HHI index of the monopoly market
is close to 1. When the HHI coef ﬁcient is smaller, it represents a
more intense market competition. In the case of four power plants,
Fig. 15. Mixed model of electricity market clearing result I (quantity and purchase
volume).
Fig. 16. Mixed model of power market clearing result II (clearing price and average
clearing price).
Fig. 17. Mixed model of electricity market and result of social welfare.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456454

the HHI value of 0.25 is the optimum.
The ﬁnal convergence value in Table 7 is the ﬁnal HHI index of
the model. The results show that the HHI value of the simulation is
approaching 0.25, which means that the market competition is
already full and the market share has reached equilibrium.
Agent-based simulation can only simulate the trading part of
the electricity market, and cannot observe the overall operation of
the electricity market. The system dynamics model can monitor the
overall power market macroscopically, but it cannot capture the
dynamic changes in details, such as the adjustment of the clearing
price in the trading part of the electricity market. This is related to
other indicators of the mathematical equation and does not re ﬂect
the process of market competition. Therefore, combining the two
models for hybrid modeling and simulation can simulate a rela-
tively complete simulation model of the multilateral bidding for the
electricity market.
From the results of the hybrid simulation, we found the entire
market operating state is stable, the clearance price will converge,
the market competition is relatively suf ﬁcient. After hybrid
modeling, the variables that originally needed to be arti ﬁcially
changed in the two models can be feedback and adjusted to each
other through hybrid modeling. So the entire model does not need
to be set manually, showing the advantages of hybrid modeling.
The hybrid modeling model runs well, and all the indicators are in
line with the actual situation and have great advantages.
In this paper, a hybrid simulation model of power market bid-
ding based on system dynamics and agent simulation is estab-
lished. It can be used to simulate the real power market multilateral
bidding process. It can also be applied to the actual problems such
as price formation mechanism, bidding mode, clearing mode and so
on in the power market. It can help us to study the internal laws of
the power market at a deeper level and a wider range. It is also
helpful for electricity market managers to solve practical problems
by means of computer simulation, and to plan and formulate pol-
icies for the future development of the power industry. It lays a
theoretical foundation for the government to formulate policies.
7. Conclusion
Modeling and simulation methods for complex systems have
their own characteristics. Different methods are often used to solve
different problems and achieve different simulation goals. This
paper studies the modeling and simulation of complex systems,
and focuses on Agent-based simulation and system dynamics
simulation methods, giving full play to the advantages of these two
modeling methods, and solving the problem of incomplete simu-
lation in complex system simulation from a new perspective. Based
on this, the hybrid simulation method of multilateral bidding in the
electricity market is studied.
The main contribution of this paper is as follows:
1) An agent-based bidding simulation method of electricity market
is studied, and an agent-based bidding simulation model is
established to simulate the bidding process. In order to improve
the agent's ability of bidding simulation, an agent reinforcement
learning algorithm is proposed. Agent achieves knowledge
acquisition and adapting environment through continuous
interaction with environment, which makes the multi-party
dynamic bidding process closer to reality. By running the
simulation model, we found the clear price of the model will
eventually converge to a stable value, and the highest and
lowest prices of each bid will also be stable, forming a stable
market pattern. With the experiment, we will ﬁnd that the
initial random number has a certain in ﬂuence on the bidding
strategy. Therefore, the trend of each clear price is an uncertain
situation, but it will eventually converge. The convergence price
will tend to a certain value only if the average is obtained by
many simulation experiments.
2) We studied the modeling and simulation method of electricity
market operation system based on system dynamics. The dy-
namic simulation model of electricity market operation system
is established. The detailed analysis of electricity market system
is completed through simulation operation. We use system
dynamics to describe the operation of electricity market from
macro perspective, and use large indicators to drive its opera-
tion. By running simulation models, we found that through the
analysis of the index capacity retention ratio, the capacity con-
centration and the marginal cost of the electricity market, we
ﬁnd the law of their in ﬂuence on the power market. Capacity
retention ratio needs to be reasonably controlled; When the
declared capacity concentration is close to 1/n (n is the number
of power plants), the market is fully competitive and is condu-
cive to market operations; Marginal costs need to be controlled
reasonably by power plants, which is bene ﬁcial to both revenue
and market supply and demand balance.
3) A hybrid simulation method based on agent simulation and
system dynamics simulation is studied. And the hybrid simu-
lation model based on electricity market is established. The
operation state in whole market is stable, which including the
convergent clearing prices, the adequate competition and the
collected clearing volume. To solve the problem that a single
market regulation cannot fully re ﬂect the clearing price in the
market competition, a mixed modeling which operate by
changing variables arti ﬁcially through the original two models,
can feedback and mutual adjustment each part of the whole
model, so that the whole model does not need manual inter-
vention, but presents advantages of combining modeling. By
running the simulation model, we found that the entire market
operating state is stable, the clearance price will converge, the
market competition is relatively suf ﬁcient. After hybrid
modeling, the variables that originally needed to be arti ﬁcially
changed in the two models can be feedback and adjusted to each
other through hybrid modeling. So that the entire model does
not need human intervention, it also shows the advantages of
hybrid modeling.
There are fewer factors involved in the analysis of the hybrid
model, resulting in an inaccurate grasp of the actual situation of the
electricity market. In view of this shortcoming, further research is
expected. Add more metrics and considerations to bring the model
closer to reality. In addition, it is expected to add new modeling
methods for hybrid modeling, such as discrete event-based
modeling methods, which will make the whole model more
comprehensive and make the problem representation closer to the
Table 7
HHI index for multiple simulation of power market mixed model.
Number of simulation 1234567891 0
HHI 0.266 0.261 0.263 0.256 0.267 0.263 0.252 0.273 0.268 0.279
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456 455

real situation.
Acknowledgments
The authors greatly acknowledge the support from National Key
Research and Development Program of China (2016YFB0901 102).
References
[1] China Energy Research Association. China energy development report 2016.
Electr. Energy 2016;37(05):640 .
[2] Xiaoping Liu, Tang Yiming, Zheng Liping. Summary of simulation research on
complex systems and complex systems. J Syst Simul 2008;20(23):6303 e15.
[3] Surender Reddy S, Abhyankar AR, Bijwe PR. Market clearing for a wind-
thermal power system incorporating wind generation and load forecast un-
certainties. In: IEEE power and energy society general meeting, san diego, CA,
USA, 22-26 July 2012; 2012. p. 1 e8.
[4] Surender Reddy S, Momoh James A. Realistic and transparent optimum
scheduling strategy for hybrid power system. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid
2015;6(6):3114e24.
[5] Surender Reddy S. Optimal scheduling of thermal-wind-solar power system
with storage. Renew Energy 2017;101:1357 e68.
[6] Tan Shuwen, Lin Shunjiang, Yang Liuqing, Zhang Anqi, Shi Weiwei,
Feng Hanzhong. Multi-objective optimal power ﬂow for a thermal-wind-solar
power system. In: IEEE PES Asia-Paci ﬁc power and energy engineering con-
ference (APPEEC), Kowloon, China, 8-11 dec. 2013; 2013. p. 1 e6.
[7] Asadi Houshyar, et al. Fuzzy-control-based ﬁve-step Li-ion battery charger by
using AC impedance technique. In: Fourth international conference on ma-
chine vision (ICMV 2011): machine vision, image processing, and pattern
analysis, 8349 834939. International Society for Optics and Photonics; 2012.
p. 1 e6.
[8] Kaboli S Hr Aghay, Selvaraj J, Rahim NA. Long-term electric energy con-
sumption forecasting via arti ﬁcial cooperative search algorithm. Energy
2016a;115:857e71.
[9] Kaboli S Hr Aghay, et al. An expression-driven approach for long-term electric
power consumption forecasting. Am. J. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2016b;1(1):
16e28.
[10] Kaboli S Hr Aghay, Selvaraj J, Rahim NA. Rain-fall optimization algorithm: a
population based algorithm for solving constrained optimization problems.
J. Comput. Sci. 2017a;19(3):31 e42.
[11] Kaboli S Hr Aghay, et al. Long-term electrical energy consumption formulating
and forecasting via optimized gene expression programming. Energy
2017b;126:144e64.
[12] Raﬁeerad AR, et al. GEP-based method to formulate adhesion strength and
hardness of Nb PVD coated on Ti-6Al-7Nb aimed at developing mixed oxide
nanotubular arrays. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 2016;61:182 e96.
[13] Raﬁeerad AR, et al. Toward improved mechanical, tribological, corrosion and
in-vitro bioactivity properties of mixed oxide nanotubes on Ti-6Al-7Nb
implant using multi-objective PSO. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 2017;69:
1e18.
[14] Delshad Modiri, Mostafa, et al. Backtracking search algorithm for solving
economic dispatch problems with valve-point effects and multiple fuel op-
tions. Energy 2016;116:637 e49.
[15] Sebtahmadi SS, Borhan Azad H, Aghay Kaboli SH, Islam MD, Mekhilef S. A PSO-
DQ current control scheme for performance enhancement of Z-source matrix
converter to drive IM fed by abnormal voltage. In: IEEE transactions on power
electronics, IEEE transactions on power electronics, vol. 33; 2018. p. 1666 e81
(2).
[16] Vincenot CE, Giannino F, et al. Theoretical considerations on the combined use
of System Dynamics and individual-based modeling in ecology. Ecol. Model.
2011;222(1):210e8.
[17] Shen Fang. Development of computer simulation technology and its appli-
cation. Technol. Commun. 2014;6(13). 232 þ 170.
[18] Li Jiadao. etc. The system design of power market simulation is realized. J. Air
Force Eng. Univ. (Nat. Sci. Ed.) 2003;4(2):87 e90.
[19] Wang Haining. Research on power market simulation technology based on
complex system multi-agent modeling. China Electric Power Research Insti-
tute; 2013 .
[20] Dong Hua. Experimental study on the trading mechanism of the power
market. South China University of Technology; 2012 .
[21] Yan Li, Li Chunjie. Preliminary study on system dynamics model of power
market operation. East China Power 2011;39(06):859 e61.
[22] Liu Dan, Cao Jiantong, Chen Jianming. Application of agent-based modeling: a
review of research. Technol. Econ. 2014;33(11):96 e102.
[23] Zhou Qing, Huang Yingying, Chen Jian. Design and simulation of dynamic
competition model based on agent. J Syst Simul 2005;(08):1977 e81.
[24] Santos Gabriel, Pinto Tiago, Morais Hugo, Sousa Tiago M, Pereira Ivo F,
Fernandes Ricardo, Praca Isabel, Vale Zita. Multi-agent simulation of
competitive electricity markets: autonomous systems cooperation for Euro-
pean market modeling. Energy Convers Manag 2015;99:387 e99.
[25] Francisco Silva, Teixeira Brígida, Pinto Tiago, Santos Gabriel, Vale Zita,
Praça Isabel. Generation of realistic scenarios for multi-agent simulation of
electricity markets. Energy 2016;116:128 e39.
[26] Wallentina Gudrun, Neuwirth Christian. Dynamic hybrid modelling: switch-
ing between AB and SD designs of a predator-prey model. Ecol Model
2017;345:165e75.
[27] Swinerd C, McNaught KR. Design classes for hybrid simulations involving
agent-based and system dynamics models. Simulat Model Pract Theor
2012;25:118e33.
[28] Lewe J-H, Hivin LF, Mavris DN. A multi-paradigm approach to system dy-
namics modeling of intercity transportation. Transport Res E Logist Transport
Rev 2014;71:188 e202.
[29] L€attil€a Lauri, Hilletofth Per, Lin Bishan. Hybrid simulation models e when,
why, how? Expert Syst Appl 2010;37(12):7969 e75.
[30] Wang Bochao, Br ^eme S /C19everin, Moon Young B. Hybrid modeling and simula-
tion for complementing Lifecycle Assessment. Comput Ind Eng 2014;69:
77e88.
[31] Charles M. Macal. To agent-based simulation from system dynamics. Proc
Winter Simul Conf 2010:371 e82.
[32] Forrester JW. System dynamics dthe next ﬁfty years, vol. 23. John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.; 2007. p. 359 e70.
[33] Liu Zhen, et al. Simulation Research on multi-agent dynamic game in power
generation side market. J Syst Eng 2008;23(5):563 e7.
[34] Nadine Schieritz, Andreas Grosler. Emergent structure in supply chain -a
study Integrating agent based simulation and system dynamics modeling. In:
The 36 st annual Hawaii international conference of the system science,
Washington, USA; 2003 .
[35] Forrester Jay. Industrial dynamics: a major breakthrough for decision makers.
Harv Bus Rev 1958;36(4):37 e46.
[36] Forrester Jay. Industrial dynamics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1961 .
[37] Kremers E, Durana JGD, Barambones O. Multi-agent modeling for the simu-
lation of a simple smart microgrid. Energy Convers Manag 2013;75:643 e50.
J. Wang et al. / Energy 180 (2019) 444 e456456
