IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2001 493
Agent-Based Simulation—An Application to the
New Electricity Trading Arrangements of England
and Wales
Derek W. Bunn and Fernando S. Oliveira
Abstract— This paper presents a large-scale application of
multiagent evolutionary modeling to the proposed new electricity
trading arrangements (NETA) in the U.K. This is a detailed
plant-by-plant model with an active specification of the demand
side of the market. NETA involves a bilateral forward market
followed by a balancing mechanism and then an imbalance
settlement process. This agent-based simulation model was able
to provide pricing and strategic insights, ahead of NETA’s actual
introduction.
Index Terms— Agent-based simulation, electricity markets, evo-
lutionary economics, imperfect competition, market design.
I. I NTRODUCTION
C
ONVENTIONAL economic modeling approaches have
shown only a limited ability to develop insights into the
strategic behavior of firms competing in new restructured mar-
kets, such as electricity. These new electricity markets, which
have emerged around the world since the early 1990s, tend to
be characterized by an oligopoly of generators, very little de-
mand-side elasticity in the short term, and complex administered
market mechanisms, which are designed to facilitate both finan-
cial trading and physical real-time system balancing. It is not
surprising, therefore, that theoretical economic analysis tends to
oversimplify, overaggregate, and represent stylized versions of
these markets. For example, analytical evaluation of the supply
function equilibria for these markets has either assumed that
the supply functions are continuous [1], whereas in practice,
generating units are offered in discrete blocks or that the industry
ownership consists of symmetric equally sized firms [2] or both
[3]. From a different auction theory perspective, von der Fehr and
Harbord [4] recognized that there is a need to model discretely,
but for tractability, their analysis was still restricted to a duopoly.
Rothkopf [5] observes that the daily repetition of these auctions
means that all players are involved in repeated games rather
than single auctions and, therefore, it is to be expected that the
continuous process of daily experimentation and learning by all
of the firms will lead to multiple transient equilibria in practice.
It is precisely these features of the problem which suggest that
agent-based computational methods could perform a useful role.
The development of a detailed simulation platform representing
the agents, the markets, and the market clearing mechanisms,
Manuscript received August 30, 2000. This work was supported by the
Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, Portugal, under Grant Praxis
XXI/BD/21769/99.
The authors are with the Decision Sciences Department, London
Business School, London NW1 4SA, U.K. (email: dbunn@london.edu;
foliveira@london.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier S 1089-778X(01)09040-3.
together with reinforcement learning to facilitate profit-seeking
behavior by the agents, can, in principle, provide a computa-
tional framework to overcome the limitations of the analytical
approaches. Furthermore, Roth and Erev [6], [7] have recog-
nized that the intermediate behavior of a dynamic game maybe
more important than its asymptotic properties. They have shown
that reinforcement-learning models outperform the equilibrium
predictions in certain games. In the broader context of manage-
ment research, the strategy and organizational behavior litera-
ture [8] has also started to model organizations as adaptive sys-
tems that learn with experience by trial and error through ex-
ploiting and exploring their environments.
However, in practice, there have been very few large-scale
applications to industry behavior. It is still, therefore, an open
question as to how well agent-based simulation can provide
useful insight at the firm level in such a complex market as elec-
tricity, not only with respect to the specification of appropriate
learning, but also in terms of analysing the multiagent multiple
equilibria output from the simulations. In this paper, we describe
one such application of agent-based simulation to explore the
economic implications of the proposed changes to the U.K. elec-
tricity market and thereby provide a timely case study in using
evolutionary computation in practice.
This study was actually motivated early in 2000 by a major
U.K. electricity company who was seriously concerned about the
impending radical reforms of the electricity market, which were
scheduled to be introduced in November 2000. The new elec-
tricity trading arrangements (NETA) would replace the manda-
tory daily uniform price auction (the “Pool”), which had operated
to provide a competitive wholesale market since 1990. The new
market would mainly be based upon continuous bilateral trading
up to “gate closure” at 3.5 h ahead of real time. Following gate
closure, the system operator (SO) would operate a kind of bal-
ancing market, the design of which was deliberately intended to
financially reward flexible plant and discourage players on both
the generation and demand side of the market from being out of
balance. The risks involved in this new system appeared, there-
fore, to be considerable and any model-based insights would have
to capture subtle details of the interrelationship of the bilateral
trading to the balancing market and the relative plant economics
thatwouldensue.Withnorealisticanalogiesfromelectricitymar-
kets elsewhere and only some limited simulations from an exper-
imental role-playing game [9], agent-based simulation appeared
to offer a real possibility to develop detailed insights into the po-
tential market ahead of its introduction (which actually happened
in March 2001).
1089–778X/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2001
Previously, Bower and Bunn [10], [11] applied agent-based
simulation to look at one aspect of the auction design involved
in NETA, namely, the switch from uniform to discriminatory
pricing. Their model did not capture the interaction between the
bilateral trading and the balancing market nor did it incorporate
any sophistication in the agents’ learning abilities. The simula-
tion platform developed here is a much more detailed represen-
tation of how NETA was designed to function.
1) It actively models the demand side (suppliers).
2) It models the interactions between two different markets
[the bilateral market and the balancing mechanism (BM)]
and also models the settlement process (SP).
3) It takes into accounts the daily dynamic constraints and
it assumes different marginal costs for each generation
technology.
II. S PECIFICATION OF THE NETA SIMULATION PLATFORM
A. Overview of NETA
The conceptualised agents in this model represent generators
(i.e., generation companies possibly owning several plants with
different generation technologies), suppliers (i.e., the agents
purchasing from wholesale market in order to “supply” end-use
customers), and the SO. In the following sections, we describe
how we have modeled the bilateral trading, the BM, the SP, and
the strategic behavior of suppliers and generators. The basic
structure of the model followed [9], [12], and [13], although
the details of the BM reflect later revisions [14], [15].
NETA is based upon unadministered bilateral trading be-
tween generators, suppliers, traders, and customers, which
takes place in the forward markets before gate closure. At the
introduction of NETA, four organizations had set up power
exchanges (PXs) to facilitate this, although it is clear that
market forces will cause liquidity to gravitate to one or two of
them. The BM works as a market where the SO buys and sells
increments (incs) or decrements (decs) of electricity in order to
balance the system as a whole. However, individual generators
and suppliers may be out of balance. During the SP, the SO will
compare the contract positions (quantities contracted), plus
whatever is bought or sold in the BM with the actual position
(quantities generated or consumed) for each one of the suppliers
and generators (plant by plant) to calculate the imbalances.
The imbalance may be a spillage (if a plant is generating more
than it has contracted or if a supplier is consuming less than it
has contracted) or a top-up (if a plant is generating less than it
has contracted or if a supplier is consuming more than it has
contracted). For both types of imbalances, there is a price: if an
agent is spilling, it will receive as payment for the electricity
generated the system sell price (SSP); if an agent is topping
up, it will pay the system buy price (SBP). The spread between
the two prices is intended to provide a penalty for being out of
balance: the SSP (SBP) is expected to be considerably lower
(higher) than the prices in the forward markets.
Let us define the following variables.
Total quantity of demand at time .
Total quantity of demand at time in the bilateral
markets.
Total quantity of top-up at time .
Total quantity bought in the BM at time .
Total quantity of generation at time .
Total quantity of spillage at time .
Total quantity sold in the BM at time
Then, the two markets together are described by the following
identities:
demand identity
and generation identity
The task of the SO is to buy or sell in the BM enough elec-
tricity to ensure that the system is always in balance
The day-ahead and within-day balancing schedules are as fol-
lows [15, p. 160].
SO Day-Ahead Balancing Process:
1) By 09:00, publishes the day-ahead demand forecast.
2) By 11:00, receives the initial physical notifications (IPNs).
3) Calculates the available national plant margin or shortfall.
4) Verifies system security given demand predictions, the
submitted IPN’s, and planned transmission outage.
5) By 12:00, issues the total system plant margin data to the
market for the day ahead.
6) Forecast constraint costs based on the estimated final phys-
icalnotifications(FPNs)andbid(offer)pricesandvolumes.
7) If necessary, calls the most economic balancing services
contracts to ensure the system security.
8) During the following 11 hours, receives updates of the
physical notifications (PNs).
9) By 16:00, publishes the revised national plant margin and
zonal margin.
SO Within-Day Balancing Process:
1) Publish half hourly averaged demand forecasts for a de-
fined period until gate closure.
2) As participants become aware of changes to their physical
position, they will advise the SO.
3) At defined times, the zonal and national margins will be
reassessed and provided to the market.
4) Undertake security analysis and reassess the requirements
of balancing services contracts.
5) At gate closure, the PNs will become FPNs and the SO
will have received bids (offers) of the prices and volumes
from the participants in the BM.
6) During the BM, the SO will balance the system, taking
into account technical constraints, dynamic operating
characteristics of generation and demand balancing
services, and uncertainty in demand.
B. Modeling NETA
Multiagent simulations can have various design objectives,
e.g., to replicate the time series properties of a real market [16]
or to search for consensus [17]. Our model was designed pri-
marily to search for possible market equilibria, given all the pa-
rameters defining the agents and the market structure.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

BUNN AND OLIVEIRA: AGENT-BASED SIMULATION—AN APPLICATION TO THE NETA 495
Modeling the balancing process is not a straightforward task
and demands some simplifications to be adopted in order to
make the problem tractable. These simplifications are much less
restrictive than the ones usually presented in the literature.
1) The transmission system was not modeled. This implies
that the model does not capture regional imbalances or
transmission constraints.
2) We model only a typical day, taking into account some
plant dynamics. The model is aimed at analysing the
process of finding the equilibrium solution for the spe-
cific daily profile simulated.
3) We have simplified the continuous nature of trading in
NETA and represented both the forward market and the
BM as two sequential one-shot markets. This implies that
the flows of information are much simpler than reality:
the players only submit their offer (bids) to the bilateral
market knowing the SO’s demand forecasts and submit
their offers (bids) to the BM knowing the expected posi-
tion of the system.
4) Finally, our model assumes independence between gener-
ators and suppliers, although vertical integration is a re-
ality in the industry. We adopt this simplification since the
regulator imposes a condition that all the trading between
the suppliers and generators belonging to the same com-
pany has to be subject to separate imbalance accounts.
In formulating the market models, the “natural” approach
would seem to be the continuous double auction [18], [19], but its
implementation with computer agents has several problems. It
requires direct communication and negotiation between agents,
the development of a multicriteria algorithm when the quantity
is variable, and finally the computational time could be an
issue in a large model such as ours. 1 Hence, we used the
single call market (SCM) developed by Cason and Friedman
[20], but we have adapted it to reflect the NETA trading
principles with the agents paying the price bid or receiving
the price offered instead of paying (receiving) the clearing
price. It should be noted that the same type of auction was
also adopted by [4], where they refer to it as a sealed-bid
multiple-unit auction. Nicolaisen et al. [21] adopted an auction
very similar to ours with the main difference being that their
agents pay (receive) the midpoint of the bid-ask spread. By
adopting an SCM, we also avoid explicitly modeling beliefs
about opponents [22].
Another challenging task was to model the suppliers and
generators. We intended to build bounded rational agents that
learn about their environment and improve their behavior with
experience, avoiding the perfect foresight paradigm. But at
the same time, following Marcet and Nicollini [23], 2 the
agents’ behavior should not be too nonrational (we have to
1In the experiments presented in this paper, we have simulated 200
trading days. In each trading day, there are 24 auctions for each hour
in the bilateral market and 24 auctions for the BM (one for each hour).
2They define three concepts that maybe used to establish lower bounds of
rationality. In asymptotic rationality, the agents’ behavior will asymptotically
converge to the optimum. In epsilon-delta rationality, agents may have
some resistance to change and may be satisfied within a solution close
enough to the optimal behavior. With internal consistency, agents’ behavior
has to have some lower rational bounds in the short run, i.e., agents
try to do the best they can over a limited horizon.
impose some lower bounds on the agents’ level of rationality).
The internal consistency requirement is the most demanding
one and we had to make sure that the agents do not choose
completely unreasonable actions, even in the early stages of
the learning process.
Another problem facing the agents is the crossing of infor-
mation. The agents take actions in two different markets—the
PX and the BM—and receive feedback from these two markets.
In order to facilitate the association between an action and its
results, the feedback process should be as close to the action as
possible. In order to accommodate this requirement, the agents
have operational objectives. Keeping in mind that the final goals
of the agent are the strategic objectives, we need to make sure
that there is an interrelation between these two types of objec-
tives. To ensure this link, we define operational rules.
Each supplier is characterized by the following prespecified
parameters: market share, BM exposure (contract cover), retail
price, prediction error, and search propensity.
Market share refers to the retail market in terms of the rel-
ative quantity of electricity sold. BM exposure reflects the per-
centage of forecast demand it intends to purchase in the PX. The
retail price is not a crucial variable; since this model is aimed
at short-term analysis, it just allows the suppliers to be modeled
as profit maximizing.Prediction errorreflects, as mean average
prediction error, the capability of the agent to predict its own de-
mand. Search propensity is an integer ranging from one to ten
that defines a heuristic controlling how the agents search for the
best payoff and transform past experience into future policies. A
low search propensity parameter will create stable policies that
change slowly with experience, whereas a high parameter will
create reactive policies that tend to follow short run experience).
Each supplier has the following instruments.
1) Markup in the PX (learned by the agent): This is relative
to the PX price (PXP) in the previous day.
2) Markup in the BM (learned by the agent):This is relative
to the PXP in the same day.
Each supplier has two strategic objectives:
1) to maximize total daily profits, given the market structure
and given its market share;
2) to minimize the difference between its objective for the
BM exposure and the actual BM exposure.
The two operational objectives are to maximize daily profits
in the PX and in the BM, respectively. They enable each agent to
associate the outcomes (such as prices, quantities, and profits)
to each instrument used and to the strategic objectives.
Suppliers also have an operational rule based upon adaptive
expectations, namely, never to bid (offer) more (less) in the BM
than the previous day’s SBP (SSP) since those are the expected
imbalance prices.3
Each generator is characterized by the following parameters:
plants, cycles, capacity, availability, BM exposure (contract
cover), and search propensity.
3This operational rule, also adopted for the generators, establishes lower
bounds for rationality. One of the agents’ strategic objectives is BM exposure.
Agents want to have a low BM exposure because of high BM price and volume
uncertainty. If suppliers (generators) choose to pay (receive) a higher (lower)
price in the PX than in the BM, their behavior would be irrational since this
behavior would contradict there BM exposure objective.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2001
TABLE I
RELATION BETWEEN CYCLES (MAXIMUM NUMBER OF STARTUPS WITHIN
A DAY) AND TYPE OF PLANT IN THE U.K.
Peak technologies (used to supply peak demand), gas turbine,
oil, and pumped storage were classified as having three daily cy-
cles. Midmerit technologies were classified with one and two cy-
cles, which include CCGT and coal. Finally, the base-load plants
(running in a nonstop regime) are the nuclear stations and the in-
terconnectors.
Plants owned by each generator are specified at the gener-
ating set level. Plants of the same type are assumed to have
similar marginal costs, startup costs, and no-load costs. The
agent’s decision-making does not take into account explicitly
the startup and no-load costs, although it will implicitly learn to
do so. Thus, each agent has an objective for the position of each
plant in the load duration curve (we identify for each plant the
maximum number of cycles per day that it can operate) and the
plant’s profit it will be penalized if it does not meet that objec-
tive. This is a reasonable way of incorporating some considera-
tion of dynamic plant constraints. Thus, we define the parameter
cycles for each type of plant (see Table I).
Thus, base-load plants with high startups or inflexible tech-
nology need to run continuously and specify zero or just one
cycle. Flexible plant with low startup cost can have a higher
number of cycles. The installedcapacity is assumed to be avail-
able with a probability specified by its availability parameter,
which reflects outage rates for each plant. BM exposure and
search propensity are the same as for the suppliers.
Each generator has the same instruments as the suppliers,
namely, it learns to mark up in the PX from the previous day
and to mark up in the BM from the PX outcome. Its strategic
objectives are:
1) to maximize daily profits, given the market structure;
2) to minimize the difference between its objective and the
actual BM Exposure for each plant.
The two operational objectives are to maximize the daily
profits in the PX and in the BM, respectively, for each plant.
In order to avoid inconsistent behavior during the learning
process, we impose some lower bounds of rationality through
operational rules.
1) Portfolio Management: A plant with higher or equal
number of cycles will never undercut the offers of another
plant with equal or less number of cycles.
2) Noninterruption: Plants that have to run continuously or
plants with one cycle may run without profit in certain
hours of the day.
3) No Loss Leading: Plants with one cycle do not run
without profit at the beginning or at the end of the day.
They prefer not to run at all if the price is to low.
4) Peak Premia: Peak plant never offer prices below mar-
ginal cost.
Together with the following two extra operational rules for
the BM.
1) Adaptive Expectation: Never bid (offer) above (below)
the previous SBP (SSP).
2) Avoidable Cost: Never pay more than the marginal cost
for “speculative” decs.
The model is organized into trading days or iterations and
runs in a day-ahead mode for a set of 24-h periods. A trading
day starts with the agents buying (selling) electricity in the PX.
In the PX, the suppliers try to buy, at a price as low as possible,
the amount of electricity needed to fulfil their contract cover ob-
jectives. The generators will try to sell at a price as high as pos-
sible, given their portfolio, and given the amount of electricity
they want to save to sell in the BM. At gate closure, each agent
will know exactly how much it has sold or bought and provides
the SO with its FPN. 4
Then the trading in the BM begins. The SO’s total demand
forecasts are common knowledge in the industry, period by pe-
riod (and we have assumed for these experiments that the fore-
casts are accurate). Nevertheless, each one of the suppliers will
have some uncertainty predicting its own demand. Thus, using
their FPN’s and its demandforecast, the SO calculates the total
system surplus or shortfall for each period in the day ahead.
Given this total system position, the SO will accept eitherincs or
decs in the BM. The trades in the BM are done between the SO
and each one of the generators and suppliers offering (bidding)
the incs or decs into the BM. We assume that the SO will, first
of all, in the interests of efficiency, clear all possible arbitrage
opportunities . Then
If , the SO will be accepting extra-incs
(extra-decs), above the arbitrage level , from generators
(only).5
After all trading in the BM has occurred and the SO has
bought or sold whatever energy was needed to balance the
system, the imbalances of each generator and supplier are
calculated. The imbalance prices and costs are computed. If
the SO accepts incs, the SBP will be defined as the weighted
average of the offers accepted in the BM. Otherwise, if the SO
accepts decs, the SSP will be defined as the weighted-average
of the bids accepted in the BM. Hence, in our model, at each
hour, only one imbalance price will be defined (SBP or SSP).
Thus, if an agent is long (short) when the system is short
(long), there will be no imbalance price defined for its case. We
adopted a rule that the SO has indicated it may have to use if
4Good behavior assumption: In this model, we assume that agents always
communicate the true FPN’s and that they always deliver what was contracted
in the PX and in the BM.
5It should be noted that a supplier without load management will not be in-
fluencing the net position of the system and so its bids in the BM are only to
cover its own uncertainty to avoid the imbalance charges. The bids (offers) of
these players will only be accepted if there is an arbitrage opportunity.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

BUNN AND OLIVEIRA: AGENT-BASED SIMULATION—AN APPLICATION TO THE NETA 497
there are insufficient bids (offers),6 which is to take the average
of past SBP (SSP) values for that particular hour for the SBP
(SSP) not defined.
III. L EARNING ALGORITHM
Although there are several agent-based concepts coming from
the field of multiagent systems [24], almost all assume that an
agent must communicate or be physically separated from the
environment. The agents used in our model have no commu-
nication capabilities. The agents are conceptual identities rep-
resenting “economic agents” in the market, having capacity to
“receive” information, learn from the interactions, and act on
the simulated environment. They are autonomous agents.7
The agents in this model learn online (given the information
set, an agent modifies its actions in order to maximize its own
profit). A “natural” way to model the learning process in a way
that “captures” human and organizational learning process is re-
inforcement learning [6]–[8]. In the artificial intelligence com-
munity, this technique has been used for a long time to make
computer programs that can learn to play games [25]–[27].
A. Defining the Markups
The learning problem is defined as follows: each player
has a tuple of instruments
, where is the ratio between
the price bid (offered) in the PX and the PXP in the previous
day. The is the ratio between the price
bid (offered) in the BM and the PXP in the same day (the agents
already have information on the PXP when they bid or offer
in the BM). The attraction of this model is its simplicity: the
agents only learn a ratio for the whole day, the margin revision
in the PX or BM is the same for each different hour of the day.
This avoids the adoption of different learning behavior for the
different levels of demand [4]. Another strong point about this
learning algorithm is the assumption that the information set
only includes the prices in the previous day. Given the present
state of the world, the agent only tries to improve its position
given the knowledge accumulated in the past, assuming that the
present contains all the relevant information (i.e., the Markov
property).
Let represent an iteration ( is the maximum number of it-
erations) and represent the time of the day
. Let also represent the price bid at it-
eration andhour inthePX(BM)and represent
the price offered at iteration and hour in the PX (BM). Then
6In practice, this will not occur as frequently as in the model. The dynamic
nature of buying and selling by the SO throughout the 3.5-h BM window, and
the locational nature of buying and selling to balance the system at the nodal
level, means that the SO will be more active than our model reflects.
7An autonomous agent is a system situated within a part of an environment
that senses that environment and acts on it, over time, in pursuit of its own
agenda and so as to affect what it senses in the future [24].
Each agent learns a different policy for each one of the four
markups. This is a very important point about this learning algo-
rithm. Agents do not learn how to choose prices they learn how
to choose the markups on the previous day prices: the result is
a model in which prices are unbounded.
The learning process is the same for each one of the four
markups. Each one of the markups was partitioned into ten dis-
crete intervals. In the experiments described in this paper, the
ratio between the price bid (offered) assumes different ranges
for suppliers and generators in different markets.
Suppliers learn different markups for the PX and the BM (one
for incs and another one for decs).8
1) Bids in the PX from 0.95 to 1.2:This allows for decreases
and increases in the price offered.
2) Incs in the BM from to 3: This allows for incs with
negative prices.
3) Decs in the BM from to 3: This allows for decs
with negative prices.
Generators also learn different markups for the PX and the
BM (one for incs and another one for decs).
1) Offers in the PX from to 1.15: This allows for
decreases and increases in the price offered. It also allows
the generators to buy in the PX (by offering a negative
price).
2) Incs in the BM from 0.6 to 3: This allows for incs higher
or lower than the PXP.
3) Decs in the BM from to 1.1: This allows for decs
with negative prices.
The larger range defined for the generators allows them to
bid above or below the clearing price and allows some plants to
receive a negative price in order to make sure some low cycle
plant runs through short price troughs.
B. Learning a Policy
At each instance, the agent calculates theexpected daily profit
and the expected acceptance rate for each one of the markups
used at that specific iteration.
1) The expected daily profit is calculated using exponential
smoothing of the profits earned on past trading days.
2) The expected acceptance rate is calculated using expo-
nential smoothing of the number of hours that a bid (offer)
was accepted in the past trading days.
Thus, given the expected acceptance rate and the expected
daily profit, each player calculates theexpected rewardfor each
markup. Then the agent constructs a utility function over the
markups. In order to construct this utility function, the agent
ranks the markups by decreasing rank of expected reward. The
markup with the highest expected reward will receive a higher
perceived utility value. This transformation also takes into ac-
count the search propensity parameter, such that a low param-
eter will be associated with a conservative utility function. A
high search parameter, on the other hand, defines a more ad-
venturous agent in trying different markups. Finally, the agent
8The intervals are constructed in a fairly ad-hoc way. They were defined in
order to allow enough freedom in the possible choices (allowing for increases
and decreases in offers and bids or infinitely negative or infinitely positive bids
or offers).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2001
will transform the utility function into a policy—an association
between each markup and the probability of bidding (offering)
that markup. The agent’s policy will be used to choose the price
in the following day. The basic ideas behind the construction of
the utility function and the derivation of the policy are inspired
by the fitness function and selection mechanisms that have been
used in genetic algorithms [28], [29].
Let represent the interval index (the markup
number) and represent the iteration. Then,
represents the daily profit (acceptance rate) at
iteration using markup . 9 represents the expected
time daily profit (conditional on acceptance) of markup .
represents the expected time acceptance rate
using markup . represents the expected time
reward of markup . stands for the rank of the
markup . and stand for the perceived utility and the
probability of using a markup . The policy is calculated with
the following algorithm. At the end of the day, after receiving
the feedback with the prices and quantities traded in each hour:
Step 1) Calculate the new expected daily profit and accep-
tance rate for the markups used.
Let represent the profit at hour and it-
eration of the markup , then the daily profit and
the acceptance rate will be, respectively,
and
Number of bids (offers) accepted
Then, for each used markup
Step 2) Recalculate the expected reward for each markup.
For every markup
Step 3) Rank the markups by descending value of the ex-
pected rewards. The ranking idea is used in the “ge-
netic algorithms” literature to avoid the fast conver-
gence of the selection process, possibly to a second
best solution.
Step 4) Calculate the perceived utility of each markup
where, for each agent, , Search Propensity, and
equal 1000, 4, and 3, respectively. This approach is
quite flexible enabling the construction of a wide va-
riety of utility functions. After calculating the per-
ceived utility from each markup, the agent trans-
forms this utility function into a policy.
Step 5) Calculate the “policy,” i.e., the probability of using
each markup . For this purpose, we have used the
9In our notation, /69/120/112/40/88 /41stands for the expected time /116value of the vari-
able /88at time /116/0 /49.
rule of proportionality: the probability of choosing a
certain markup is directly proportional to the weight
of that markup perceived utility in the sum of per-
ceived utilities of all markups
This algorithm differs from Erev and Roth’s work [6], [7] on
three main points.
1) Our model is a pure strategy stochastic game. Our agents
try to learn the best pure strategy and the learning process
is organized in order to find pure strategy equilibria
2) Our model takes into account the exploration vs exploita-
tion problem . In Erev–Roth’s model, these concepts
are not present. In the reinforcement learning problem
[25]–[27], the agent has to define how much exploration
and exploitation to undertake. In order to allow agents
to explore new strategies, we used the utility function
model. Thus, agents only use, with a high probability,
the best strategy or the first three best strategies and only
with a small probability do they use the other ones.
3) The players always have the same probabilities of ex-
ploitation or exploration, independently of the iteration
of the game . This approach keeps the agents’ capacity
of reaction to changes constant along the simulation: this
makes the model suitable to deal with nonstationary en-
vironments. In Roth–Erev’s basic model [6], the proba-
bility of choosing a certain strategy is directly propor-
tional to the expected reward. The implication of this
is that Roth–Erev’s algorithm tends to converge to local
equilibria with insufficient search of the solution space.
Table II illustrates the learning process.
Overall, the simulation model can be summarized by the be-
havioral pseudocode outlined in the Appendix.
IV . INITIAL SIMULATIONS OF THE NEW ELECTRICITY TRADING
ARRANGEMENTS
The NETA simulation model, as described above, was applied
to the full system of England and Wales as it existed in summer
2000 with 80 generating plants owned by 24 generators who sell
power to 13 suppliers. All the experiments have simulated 200
iterations (trading days) of the algorithm based upon the winter
demand profile, shown in Fig. 1, with an available capacity of
around 56 GW.
In the experiments presented, we use a 0.5 smoothing pa-
rameter (learning rate). The retail price was fixed at £80. The
plant availability was defined as a function of the technology:
base-load technology is available 99% of the days, while the
flexible technology is available 95% of the days.
The estimated marginal generation costs for each plant
ranged from £3 MWh to £94 MWh. The low marginal costs are
associated with base-load plants, nuclear, combined cycle gas
turbine (CCGT), and some large coal plants. The high marginal
costs are associated with gas turbines, pumped storage, and oil
plants. The estimates used are consistent with those used in
other published studies on the U.K. generation market, as well
as with known data on plant efficiencies and fuel costs. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

BUNN AND OLIVEIRA: AGENT-BASED SIMULATION—AN APPLICATION TO THE NETA 499
TABLE II
POLICY DERIV ATIONEXAMPLE
Agent has ten different possible markups and it builds a policy on them.
/69/120/112/40/80/114/102/41, /69/120/112/40/82/119/100/41, and /69/120/112/40/65/114/116/41represent, respectively, the
expected time /116profit and reward and the expected time /116acceptance rate of
each markup /106. /82/97/110/107/40/106/41orders the rewards from the highest to the lowest
expected reward. /85/116/105/108represents the perceived utility an agent receives from
a certain markup. /80/111/108represents the probability of using a certain markup
when bidding (offering).
Fig. 1. Standard winter daily demand profile: the demand profile used in the
experiments presented in this paper has three peaks of demand in order to make
the generators task more difficult (they have to decide when to start a plant given
the demand cycles).
relation between cycles and the plants’ positions in the supply
curve is presented in Fig. 2.
A. Market Results
Initial results give an overview of how the model is working
and the evolution of prices and quantities traded in the PX and
BM. In Table III, we analyze the impact of suppliers’ prediction
error on the quantities sold and bought in the BM and on the
imbalances (spillage and top-up).
The quantity traded (bought or sold) in the BM is less than
2.5% of the total trade in the PX. As one might expect, the
prediction error is a determinant factor in the amount traded
and these results point to the economic gain, which could be
achieved through better forecasting, by the suppliers (these
agents are the ones that will be paying the imbalance charges
resulting from prediction errors). Whilst forecasting load at the
national level has become very accurate (2% mean absolute
percentage error), at the regional level, where metering is less
frequent and where there had not been a need to forecast ac-
curately in such a short time scale, errors of between 5%–10%
are thought to be the norm. Imbalances and trade in the BM
are different concepts. The spillage and top-up represent from
2.5% to 2.9% of total trade in the PX, with a low prediction
error and represent 5.0%–6.1% of total trade in the PX for the
higher prediction error. The reason why imbalances represent a
higher percentage than trades in the BM is that some positive
imbalances can cancel the negative ones. Overall, these results
show that the risks of NETA are much greater for suppliers. The
Fig. 2. Plant cycles in the supply curve: Plots the type of cycle defined for each
plant along the supply curve. On average flexible plant have higher marginal
cost.
TABLE III
QUANTITIES TRADED IN THE BM AND TOTAL IMBALANCES
Sell (buy) BM stands for the quantity sold (bought) in the BM.
Spill (top-up) is the total electricity that suppliers consumed
below (above) the FPNs or generators produced above (below)
the FPNs. All quantities are presented as a percentage of the
total trade in the PX.
Fig. 3. Average daily prices (moving 24 hours window): PXP, SBP and SSP.
Price evolution in the PX and in the BM for the 200 iterations of the experiment.
generators can control their imbalances with the exception of
unplanned technical outages, while the suppliers are completely
dependent on industry prediction capabilities.
An example of how the model learns can be seen in Fig. 3,
which displays a representation of the average daily prices (24-h
moving window) in the PX and in the BM (PXP, SBP, and
SSP) during the 200 iterations of the baseline experiment. Note
that market prices do emerge to create a wide spread between
SBP and SSP and that PXP is centrally located between them.
This is what the advocates of NETA hoped would occur in that
out-of-balance players would regret they had not traded forward
at PXP. The level of prices that have emerged around £50 MWh
for winter days is rather high because in this experiment, as will
be seen below, agents learn to exercise market power and create
price spikes at the two peak periods. Notice that the SBP is much
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2001
TABLE IV
FINAL ITERATION FOR THE WINTER DAY BASELINE SCENARIO
It describes the quantity demanded, the marginal costs, and prices (price in the PX and the SBP) during the last iteration for
each hour of the day. Markups represent the percent increase of the PXP and of the SBP compared to the marginal cost.
more volatile than the PXP or the SSP. Notice also the emer-
gence of daily price cycles (with high prices at the peaks) as
agents learn from experience.
To look at the daily price profile in more detail, the actual
prices on the last iteration are shown in Table IV .
The peak prices spikes are noteworthy, as the PXP ranges
from £14.5 to £29.5 in the offpeak hours to £318 and £509 in
the two peak hours. The markups PXP/MC above 60% are asso-
ciated with capacity used above 80% and the “price explosion”
only happens with capacity used above 85%.
The prices can be divided into three periods:
1) a low demand period (below 80% of available capacity),
where the prices tend to be close to marginal costs;
2) an average demand period (between 80% and 85% of
available capacity ), where the prices are at least 60%
above the marginal costs;
3) a high demand period (above 85% of available capacity),
where the prices rise to at least 38 times the marginal cost.
Notice the small difference incapacity used between the high
demand and the average demand period: this is due to the supply
function’s shape.
These results are stronger than the ones in [4]. The experi-
ments show that even if the demand is lower than the total ca-
pacity, prices may rise well above the marginal cost. Thus, there
is a threshold above which collusion is possible and sustainable
and there is another above which only the regulator can stop
prices from unbounded spiking.
In the rest of the analysis, we disregard these two hours with
demand of 49 GW, since the equilibrium was not reached. It
is also interesting to note that the offpeak prices (without these
two hours) show a profile of PXP’s consistent10 with the 6-mo
forward prices, which were emerging in summer 2000, ahead
of the planned NETA introduction during the winter (and indeed
close to what did occur in the early months of NETA after March
2001).
B. Strategic Implications for Suppliers
The 13 suppliers used in the experiments had market shares of
between 3.6% and 12.2%. The analysis of the suppliers initially
focused on two main issues: demand prediction capabilities and
contract cover (how much of there expected demand they want
to buy in the PX). In Table V , we specify the five experiments
on this theme.
We used regression analysis to test the influence of the sep-
arate effects. The regression for the offpeak hours, where the
dependent variable is the suppliers’ profit per unit sold , is re-
ported in Table VI.
The regression in Table VI shows that the lower the predic-
tion error, the higher the profit per unit sold of the industry as a
whole, given an objective for contract cover of 100%. The ex-
periments have also shown that a contract cover of 115% (85%)
has a negative (positive) impact on the suppliers’ profit per unit
sold. This is a result that surprised the supply industry since con-
10In August 2000, forward prices for offpeak winter 2000/2001 were aver-
aging £22/MWh.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

BUNN AND OLIVEIRA: AGENT-BASED SIMULATION—AN APPLICATION TO THE NETA 501
TABLE V
EXPERIMENTS WITH SUPPLIERS’PARAMETERS
In each experiment, a different combination of demand predic-
tion capabilities and contract cover objective is tried.
TABLE VI
DEPENDENT VARIABLE—S UPPLIERS PROFIT PER UNIT SOLD
“Two,” “Three,” “Four,” and “Five” are dummy variables representing experi-
ments 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively (i.e., “Two” is 1 to indicate experiment two or
zero, otherwise). Experiment one is our base case. /116statistics are presented in
parentheses.
ventional wisdom has been that they would be wise to be risk
averse to imbalances and, if anything, be slightly overcontracted
in their FPNs. In our model, however, the intuition is that if
all suppliers undercontract, the PXP falls given the reduction
in demand. Following that, the generators expect a lower price
in the BM and also have extra capacity available to sell, so the
BM price falls as well.
C. Strategic Implications for Generation
In order to study generators’ behavior, we analyze two de-
pendent variables: profit per unit of capacity available and price
offered in the PX (price-offered PX). Note these variables are
defined at the plant level. The objective is to identify a relation-
ship between generators’ behavior and plant ownership struc-
ture. The regression parameters for the profits per unit of ca-
pacity available in the offpeak hours (for the accepted offers in
the PX) are presented in Table VII (Model 1). The regression
parameters for price-offered PX (for the accepted offers in the
offpeak hours) are presented in the Table VII (Model 2).11
Applying hierarchical clustering to Model 1 and Model 2 pa-
rameters, we have identified the following strategic groups of
generators.
1) AES, MG, and PG: These generators have lower profits
per unit and lower prices than average. These players own
base-load plants that they use intensively with low profits
per unit of capacity available.
2) BE and EDF: These generators have a low price and con-
tinuous running policy.
3) EP: This generator has a portfolio based on some
base-load plants (large coals) with “high” marginal costs
and a few very flexible and “low” cost plants, the pumped
storage. EP had a very good performance on the pumped
storage and a below average performance on the large
coals.
11Although some of the estimated regression parameters are not statistically
significant, the overall results do provide an indication for the informal clus-
tering into strategic groups.
TABLE VII
DUMMY VARIABLES
AES, BE, EP, MG, NP , PG, and TXU identify the seven main
owners of plant portfolios. C1, C2, and C3 identify plants with
one cycle, two cycles, and three cycles, respectively. Dependent
variables in model 1 and model 2 are the plant profit per unit
of capacity available and the plant prices offered PX (for the
accepted offers only), respectively. /116statistics are presented in
parentheses.
4) NP and TXU: These generators belong to the same
structural group, characterized as “diverse portfolios
with dominant positions.” These agents have a policy of
high pricing (prices above average).
The flexible technology (two and three cycles) tends to price
and have profits per unit above average. The fact that a plant
belongs to a certain portfolio of plant owned by different gen-
erators also has a significant effect in its pricing behavior. This
suggests that the interrelatedness of plant ownership and profits
will continue to promote the active buying and selling of plant
through the capital markets, as generators seek to reposition
their portfolios of plant.
V. CONCLUSION
Agent-based computational methods can provide insights
into pricing and strategic behavior in complex new markets
such as electricity. Imperfect competition, exercised through
the daily repetition of a competitive market with administered
market rules, creates a process of continuous experimentation
and gaming that agent-based simulation is able to imitate.
Overall, the results obtained in this study were plausible to the
industry, the prices reasonably well calibrated, and the model
represented the first detailed study of the interrelationship of
the bilateral trading to the balancing market in the proposed
NETA for the U.K.
In summary, the insights into NETA which came out of this
modeling were the following.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

502 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2001
1) The amount of trading in the BM may be less than 2%
of the total amount sold in the bilateral markets, but the
imbalances will be much higher (how high depends on
the prediction errors by the suppliers).
2) There is no incentive for the SO to publish more accurate
predictions, yet this would improve the efficiency of the
industry.
3) NETA will have a greater risk impact on suppliers than on
generators, even though one of the ideals of the reform
was to make the wholesale electricity market less of a
“generators’ market.”
4) The capacity margin (demand as a percentage of total ca-
pacity available) seems to be the most important factor
behind the possibility of collusive behavior on the gener-
ation side. There is a threshold above which collusion is
possible and sustainable and there is another above which
only the regulator can restrain unbounded spikes. Other
experiments not reported in this paper on the parameter
availability have shown that withholding capacity may
have an extreme impact on the peak prices (but, in the
experiments reported, a tightening of the capacity margin
by 5% had a important impact on prices).
5) The experiments have also shown that a contract cover
of 115% (85%) has a negative (positive) impact on the
suppliers’ profit per unit sold. If they collectively learn
to undercontract in this way, they will exert some market
power on the supply side.
6) Flexible plant will be relatively more valuable in the new
market mechanism, yet its value will depend upon the
portfolio of ownership. This interrelatedness will ensure
that there will be continued activity in buying and selling
plant amongst generators as they seek to reposition them-
selves in the market.
Finally, there is always a caveat in the use of models such as
these. They embed a number of behavioral assumptions and are
constrained by exogenous parameters. For example, the learning
model is based upon adaptive expectations between the PX, the
BM, and the next day’s PX and BM. It is plausible to think
of more sophisticated agents, but that may raise computational
limitations. The model simulated here is already very large and
complex by multiagent standards. Similarly, it would be attrac-
tive if some of the parameters were endogenous variables. Con-
tract cover is one, in particular, where we would like to see
some emergent behavior. Nevertheless, this application has rep-
resented a major innovative application of agent-based simu-
lation to a real issue—that of understanding the implications
NETA, where there had previously been a shortage of reliable
analytical, empirical, and experimental insight.
APPENDIX
Pseudocode for the NETA Simulation System
Behavior
For /73/61/49:Number of iterations
Step 1) Suppliers predict demand for each
hour
Step 2) Generators define which plants can
run
Step 3) Generators offer in the PX
Step 4) Suppliers bid in the PX
Step 5) Trading in the PX and calculation
of System Position in each one of the
hours
Step 6) Generators and Suppliers offer
(bid) into the BM
Step 7) Trading in the BM and calculation
of imbalance prices
Step 8) Settlement Process: calculation of
imbalances for each one of the suppliers
and generators (plant by plant)
Step 9) Learning
End
Subcode for Suppliers’ Learning Behavior
Step 1) Verify if the objective for the BM
Exposure was achieved. If it was not,
penalize the profit obtained in the PX.
Step 2) Given the daily profits in the PX
and in the BM revise, for the markup
used, the:
- Expected profit in the PX and in the
BM
- Expected acceptance rate in the PX and
in the BM
Step 3) Define the new bidding policy for
the next day.
In the beginning of the next day:
Step 4) After calculating predictions for
demand, define the quantities and prices
bid, making sure that the operational
rule of behavior is respected.
Subcode for Generators’ Learning Behavior
For each plant in the portfolio:
Step 1) Verify if the objectives for the BM
Exposure and the Position in the Load
Duration Curve were achieved. If they
were not achieved penalise the profit
obtained.
Step 2) Given the daily profits in the PX
and in the BM revise, for the markup
used, the:
- Expected profit in the PX and in the
BM.
- Expected acceptance rate in the PX and
in the BM.
Step 3) Define the new offering policy for
the next day.
In the beginning of the next day:
Step 4) Define the quantities and prices
offered for each plant, after knowing
which plants are available, making sure
that all the operational rules of
behavior are respected.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

BUNN AND OLIVEIRA: AGENT-BASED SIMULATION—AN APPLICATION TO THE NETA 503
REFERENCES
[1] R. Green, “Increasing competition in the British electricity spot market,”
J. Ind. Econom., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 201–216, 1996.
[2] A. Rudkevitch, M. Duckworth, and R. Rosen, “Modeling electricity
pricing in a deregulated generation industry: The potential for oligopoly
pricing in a pool,” Energy J., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 19–48, 1998.
[3] R. Green and D. Newbery, “Competition in the british electricity spot
market,” J. Political Econ., vol. 100, no. 5, pp. 929–953, 1992.
[4] N.-H. M. von der Fehr and D. Harbord, “Spot market competition in the
U.K. electricity industry,” Econom. J., vol. 103, no. 418, pp. 531–546,
May 1993.
[5] M. H. Rothkopf, “Daily repetition: A neglected factor in the analysis of
electricity auctions,” Electricity J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 61–70, Apr. 1999.
[6] A. E. Roth and I. Erev, “Learning in extensive-form games: Exper-
imental data and simple dynamic models in the intermediate term,”
Games Econom. Behav., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 164–212, Jan. 1995.
[7] I. Erev and A. E. Roth, “Predicting how people play games: Reinforce-
ment learning in experimental games with unique, mixed strategy equi-
libria,” Amer. Econom. Rev., vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 848–881, Sept. 1998.
[8] R. A. Bettis and C. K. Prahalad, “The dominant logic: Retrospective and
extension,” Strategic Manage. J., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 5–14, Jan. 1995.
[9] (1999) Role playing simulations of the new electricity trading arrange-
ments, a report to the Reta Programme. London Economics, London,
U.K. [Online]. Available: http://www.londecon.co.uk/
[10] J. Bower and D. W. Bunn, “A model-based comparison of pool and bi-
lateral market mechanisms for electricity trading,” Energy J., vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 1–29, 2000.
[11] , “Experimental analysis of the efficiency of uniform-Price v dis-
criminatory auctions in the england and wales electricity market,” J.
Econom. Dyn. Control, vol. 25, no. 3–4, pp. 561–592, 2001.
[12] (1999, July) The new electricity trading arrangements. Office of
Gas and Electricity Markets, London, U.K. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/docs/reta3.pdf
[13] (1999, Oct.) The new electricity trading arrangements, Ofgem DTI con-
clusions document. Office of Gas and Electricity Markets/DTI, London,
U.K. [Online]. Available: http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/docs/netaoct.pdf
[14] (2000, Mar.) Settlement administration agent user requirements speci-
fication. Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, London, U.K. [Online].
Available: http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/elarch/retadocs/mitbpm08.pdf
[15] (2000, Apr.) NGC incentives under NETA. Office of Gas
and Electricity Markets, London, U.K. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/docs/ngcfeb2.pdf
[16] B. LeBaron, W. B. Arthur, and R. Palmer, “Time series properties of an
artificial stock market,” J. Econom. Dyn. Control, vol. 23, no. 9–10, pp.
1487–1516, Sept. 1999.
[17] E. Ephrati and J. S. Rosenschein, “Deriving consensus in multiagent
systems,” Artif. Intell., vol. 87, no. 1–2, pp. 21–74, Nov. 1996.
[18] P. R. Milgrom, “Auction Theory,” in Advances in Economic Theory:
Fifth World Congress, T. Bewley, Ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 1987, pp. 1–32.
[19] R. Wilson, “Game-theoretic analysis of trading processes,” in Ad-
vances in Economic Theory: Fifth World Congress , T. Bewley,
Ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987, pp. 33–70.
[20] T. N. Cason and D. Friedman, “Price formation in single call markets,”
J. Econometrica, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 311–345, Mar. 1997.
[21] J. Nicolaisen, V . Petrov, and L. Tesfatsion. (2000, Aug.) Market power
and efficiency in a computational electricity market with discriminatory
double-auction pricing. Dept. Economics, Iowa State Univ., Ames, IA.
[Online]. Available: http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/mpeieee.pdf
[22] D. Carmel and S. Markovitch, “Learning models of intelligent agents,”
in Proc. 13th Nat. Conf. Artificial Intelligence, Aug. 1996, pp. 62–67.
[23] A. Marcet and J. P. Nicollini. (1997) Recurrent hyperinflations and
learning. Dept. Econ. and Business, Univ. Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona,
Spain. [Online]. Available: http://www.econ.upf.es/
[24] S. Franklin and A. Graesser, “Is it an agent, or just a program?: A tax-
onomy for autonomous agents,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Agent The-
ories, Architectures, and Languages, Aug. 1997, pp. 21–35.
[25] G. Weiss, “Adaptation and learning in multi-agent systems: Some re-
marks and a bibliography,” in Adaptation and Learning in Multiagent
Systems, G. Weiss and S. Sen, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag,
1995, pp. 1–21.
[26] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore, “Reinforcement
learning: A survey,”J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 4, pp. 237–285, Jan. 1996.
[27] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: an Introduc-
tion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
[28] Z. Michalewicz, Genetic Algorithms /43DataStructures /61Evolution
Programs, 2nd ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1992.
[29] D. Whitley and J. Kauth, “Genitor: a different genetic algorithm,”
Dept. Comput. Sci., Colorado State Univ., Fort Collins, CO, Tech. Rep.
CS-88–101, 1988.
Derek W. Bunn received the M.A. degree from Cambridge University, Cam-
bridge, U.K., and M.Sc. degree from Imperial College, London University, U.K.,
and the Ph.D. degree from the London Business School, London Univeristy,
U.K.
He is currently a Professor of Decision Sciences at the London Business
School, London, U.K. Previously, he was with Stanford University and Oxford
University. He is the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Forecasting and Energy
Economics and has been on the editorial boards of ten other journals
Fernando S. Oliveira received the B.S. degree in economics and the M.Sc.
degree in artificial intelligence and computation from the University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal, in 1995 and 1999, respectively. He is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in decision sciences at the London Business School, London,
U.K.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
