4744 IEEETRANSACTIONSONPOWERSYSTEMS,VOL.31,NO.6,NOVEMBER2016
Agent-BasedModelinginElectricalEnergyMarkets
Using Dynamic Bayesian Networks
Kaveh Dehghanpour, Student Member , IEEE, M. Hashem Nehrir, Life Fellow, IEEE ,
JohnW. Sheppard, Fellow, IEEE, and Nathan C. Kelly, Student Member , IEEE
Abstract— Due to uncertainties in generation and load, optimal
decision making in electrical energy markets is a complicated
and challenging task. Participating agents in the market have to
estimate optimal bidding strategies based on incomplete public
information and private assessment of the future state of the
market, to maximize their expected proﬁt at different time scales.
In this paper, we present an agent-based model to address the
problem of short-term strategic bidding of conventional genera-
tion companies (GenCos) in a power pool. Based on the proposed
model, each GenCo agent develops a private probabilistic model
of the market (using dynamic B ayesian networks), employs an
online learning algorithm to tr ain the model (sparse Bayesian
learning), and infers the future state of the market to estimate
the optimal bidding function. We show that by using this mul-
tiagent framework, the agents will be able to predict and adapt
to approximate Nash equilibrium of the market through time
using local reasoning and inco mplete publicly available data.
The model is implemented in MATLAB and is tested on four test
case systems: two generic systems with 5 and 15 GenCo agents,
and two IEEE benchmarks (9-b us and 30-bus systems). Both
the day-ahead (DA) and hour-ahead (HA) bidding schemes are
implemented. The results show a drop in market power in the
15-agent system compared to 5-agent system, along with a Pareto
superior equilibrium in the HA scheme compared to the DA
scheme, which corroborates the validity of the proposed decision
making model. Also, the simulations show that introduction of
an HA decision making stage as an uncertainty containment tool,
leads to a more stable and less volatile price signal in the market,
which consequently results in ﬂatter and improved proﬁt curves
for the GenCos.
Index Terms— Dynamic Bayesian networks, multiagent systems,
Nash equilibrium, sparse Bayesian learning, strategic bidding.
I. INTRODUCTION
U
NBUNDLING of the electrical power supply industry
and the introduction of market-based energy manage-
ment logic into power systems has created an interactive
system of decision-making-agents that seek to optimize their
ManuscriptreceivedJuly01,2015;re visedOctober19,2015andDecember
10, 2015; accepted January 20, 2016. Date of publication February 26, 2016;
dateofcurrentversionOctober18,2016.ThisworkwassupportedbytheU.S .
DepartmentofEnergy,OfﬁceofScience,BasicEnergySciences,underAwar d
#DE-FG02-11ER46817.Paperno.TPWRS-00937-2015.
K. Dehghanpour, M. H. Nehrir, and N. Kelly are with the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Montana State Univer-
sity, Bozeman, MT 59717 USA (e-mail: hnehrir@ece.montana.edu;
Kaveh.dehghanpour@msu.montana.edu;kellyna4@gmail.com).
J.W.SheppardiswiththeDepartmentofComputerScience,MontanaState
University, Bozeman, MT 59715 USA (e-mail: john.sheppard@cs.montana.
edu).
Colorversionsofoneormoreoftheﬁguresinthispaperareavailableonlin e
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
DigitalObjectIdentiﬁer10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2524678
localobjectives.Inthiscontext,inoligopolisticmarkets(i.e.,a
marketwithafewdominantﬁrms ),privately-ownedgeneratio n
companies(GenCos)trytomaximizetheirexpectedproﬁtfrom
salesofenergytotheconsumersbybiddingstrategicallyinthe
market.Thus,GenCosexercisemarketpowertoaffectthestate
of the energy market to their beneﬁt.
However, power markets are abounded with uncertainty: in-
termittent renewable energy resources, and variable electrical
loadaretwomainsourcesofuncer tainty.Moreover,eachagent,
by affecting the outcome of the market, is a source of uncer-
taintytoitscompetitors.Hence,theproblemofoptimaldecision
making by participating agents in the market turns out to be a
complex issue that has attracted considerablescientiﬁcinterest
in the past decade.
Strategic bidding in pool-based energy markets has been
studied in the literature using the concepts of game theory.
It has been shown that the oligopolistic energy markets can
be modelled using bi-level optimization problems [1], [2]. At
the top level, GenCos pursue the maximization of their proﬁt
functions, while at the lower level the Independent System
Operator (ISO) agent solves a social welfare maximization
problem to clear the market. Thus, the higher level optimiza-
tion problems are constrained by the lower level problem.
If the lower level problem is convex it can be replaced by
its Karush-Kuhn-Tucker optimality conditions (KKT), which
resultsinanEquilib riumProblemwithEquilibriumConstraints
(EPEC), which is a system of coupled Mathematical Programs
with Equilibrium Constraints (MPEC) [3], [4]. The solution of
EPEC would be the Nash Equilibrium (NE) [5] of the energy
market, which is a strategy proﬁle of the agents from which
none has any incentive to deviate unilaterally. The EPEC has
beendescribed analyticallyasaStackelberggamewithseveral
leaders (GenCos) and one common follower (ISO) [6]. Many
papersarededicatedto solvingthissystem of nestedoptimiza-
tion problems. Different approaches have been employed to
simplifyandﬁndtheequilibriumofthemarket:diagonalization
[7],[8],binaryexpansion[9],[10],particleswarmoptimization
[11], variational inequality techniques [12], [13], information
gap decision theory [14], polynomial equations [15], and the
penalty interior point algorithm [6] are some of the tools that
have been used in previous works. While these papers provide
invaluable analytic a li n s i g h to ne n e r g ym a r k e t s ,t h e yd on o t
study the details of agent-based temporal learning process
under uncertainty and incomplete information that leads to the
market equilibrium.
Several papers have addressed the application of multiagent
system (MAS) theory to energy markets. A remarkable review
is presented in [16], in which the shortcomings of analytical
0885-8950 © 2016 IEEE. Personaluse ispermitted, butrepublication/redistribution requiresIEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.htmlfor more information.Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

DEHGHANPOUR et al.:AGENT-BASEDMODELINGINELECTRICALENERGYMARKETSUSINGDYNAMICBAYESI ANNETWORKS 4745
approaches are pointed out. In[17], a rule-based naïve rein-
forcement learning (RL) algorithm is employed for each agent
to search separately for optimal bidding strategies. In [18], an
RL-based day-ahead (DA) bidding procedure for GenCos is
proposed, based on discrete Markov decision processes. This
method has been applied in [19] to study the effects of water
shortage on electric power generation. Another RL scheme is
introduced in [20] to study the dynamics of forward and spot
markets. The effects of initialbelief of the agents employing
RL on the outcome of energy market is studied in [21]. As an-
other RL-based technique, Q-learning is used in [22] to im-
plement an agent-based model for energy markets. An inter-
esting recently published work employs a multi-layer agent-
based model to study the energy markets, considering the un-
certainbehaviorofcompetitors[23].Thispaper reliesonprob-
abilistic scenario generation and stochastic programming. Sto-
chastic programming is also used in [24] in combination with
a branch-and-bound method for uncertainty assessment in the
market. Agent-based optimal decision making in energy mar-
ketsusingnumericalsensitivityanalysisisproposedin[25].
Previous works on agent-based decisionm a k i n gi ne n e r g y
markets have mostly relied on reinforcement learning and sto-
chastic programming to develop agent-level decision making
models [26]. However, a shortcoming of these works is their
dependence on discretizing the space of states and actions of
agents. This on one hand, might lead to suboptimal solutions
and on the other hand, introduces a limitation on applicability
andscalabilityofthemodels.Oneshortcomingofthemethods
thatarebasedonstochasticprogrammingistheirdependenceon
probabilitydensityfunctionstha tarenon-stationaryandhardto
obtain [27]. Also, the integration of forecasting tools has been
mostly ignored.
In this paper, we present a novel probabilistic model for
GenCos' optimal decision making in energy markets. The
agent-based reasoning apparatus is based on a Dynamic
Bayesian Network (DBN) representation [28] where Sparse
BayesianLearning(SBL)isemployedformodeltraining.DBNs
provide a natural and efﬁcient framework to study reasoning
underuncertainty;DBNscanbescaledtoincludealargenumber
ofrandomvariables,ifnecessary.Thus,theyhavebeenadopted
hereformodelingagents'behaviorinelectricalenergymarkets.
The presented DBN-based model constitutes thebelief system
of agents on the state of the market. This belief system is up-
datedconstantlythroughparticipationintheDAandHAenergy
markets. Each agent, using its private belief system develops
offercurvesaccordingtoaLinear SupplyFunctionEquilibrium
(LSFE) model [29], [30], which provides an efﬁcient and
realisticmodelofbehaviorofGenCosinthemarket.
Twosourcesofuncertaintyareconsideredinthispaper:elec-
tricalload,andGenCocompetitorsbehavior.Theelectricalde-
mand side is assumed to be inelastic. Real load data from the
Pennsylvania-NewJersey-Maryland(PJM)marketisfedtothe
marketmodeltosimulatethetemp oralchangesofelectricalde-
mand[31].Torepresentandpre dictthe behaviorofcompeting
GenCos, a Residual Demand Curve (RDC) [32], [33], is em-
ployed. Since the agents do not have access to the cost func-
tions and decisions made by competitors, they have to rely on
incomplete publiclyavailabledata (whichis assumed tobethe
aggregate demand and supply curves published by the ISO) to
construct their individual RDC. Both the load and RDC pre-
dictionfunctionalitiesareinteg ratedintotheDBN-basedbelief
system of the agents.
The DBN-based decision making model provides adaptive
agentbehaviorthroughvariable anduncertainconditionsinthe
market. An advantage of the proposed model is that it is based
oncontinuous-valuedvariables;hence,complexitiespertaining
todiscretizationandthepossibilityofsuboptimalsolutions are
avoided.AnotheradvantageoftheDBN-basedmodelisthatthe
introduced probabilistic decision making tool is free and inde-
pendentofanyassumptionsonprobabilitydensityfunctionsof
the variables of the energy market; hence, avoiding the short-
coming of stochastic programming.
To summarize, the main contributions of this paper are as
follows:
—To provide an agent-based decision making tool for en-
ergymarkets,usingprobabili sticgraphicalmodels.Specif-
ically,adynamicBayesiannet workisselectedasthetool
thatis mostﬁtforthetaskofmodelingthebeliefsystems
ofGenCos,asexplainedlaterinthepaper(SectionIII).
—To avoid discretization of decision/action space, we have
employed sparse Bayesian learning to train the dynamic
Bayesian networks for each agent. Also, using the pro-
posedbeliefsystem,particle-basedsamplingis employed
for forecasting.
Therestofthepaperisconstructedasfollows.InSectionII,
the basics of the agent-based m odel are explained. In
Section III the DBN-based belief system of GenCo agents,
along with learning and inference schemes are described.
Simulation results are presented and discussed in Section IV.
Conclusion are reported in Sections V.
II. STRUCTURE OF THEAGENT-BASED SYSTEM
The energy market under study is formulated into a hierar-
chical multiagent system, as shown in Fig. 1. At the top level,
GenCo agents compete with each other to supply the inelastic
demandbysubmittingoptimalbid dingfunctions.Thereisnodi-
rectcommunicationlinkamongGenCocompetitors,andanyin-
teractionamongthemtakesplacethroughmarketoutcomeand
thus, is indirect by nature. At the bottom level, the ISO agent
clearsthemarket based on the received bidding functions.The
details of the agents' functions are discussed below. Also, the
DA/HA bidding procedure of the GenCo agents is introduced
for market modeling.
A. Genco Agents Model
The cost function of the th GenCo agent is modeled
asaquadraticfunctionofitsoutputpower ,asgivenin(1).
Fixedcostelementsareignored.Also,thepowerproductionof
theGenCoisboundedbyitsmaximumpowercapacity ,
whichdeﬁnesthefeasibleoperationalregionoftheGenCo.
(1)
Themarginalcostfunctionofthe thagent istherefore,
a linear function of output power:
(2)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

4746 IEEETRANSACTIONSONPOWERSYSTEMS,VOL.31,NO.6,NOVEMBER2016
Fig. 1. Structure of the multiagent market model.
InapurelycompetitivemarkettheGenCosactasprice-takers
andbidtheirmarginalcostfunctionstothemarket[34],whereas
in an oligopolistic market, GenCo agents submit bidding func-
tions that deviate from their marginal cost curves, in order to
maximizetheirexpectedproﬁt. Price-makingGenCosexercise
some levels of market power. In this paper we have adopted
LSFE model for GenCos' bidding procedure. Thus, the sub-
mittedbiddingfunction totheISOagentisalinearfunc-
tion of outputpower of the GenCo, as follows:
(3)
where,thecoefﬁcients ,and areassignedbythe thGenCo,
tomaximizeitsexpectedproﬁtlevel.Therefore,thegoalofthe
strategic bidding problem is to optimally parameterize the bid-
dingfunctionsoftheGenCos.Inthispaper,wehaveusedwhat
is known as intercept-parameterization [21] (i.e., the slope of
is kept equal to the slope of ,a n dt h ei n -
tercept with the price axis is modiﬁed). The merits of inter-
cept-parameterization are discussed in [6]. Hence, is
determined as follows:
(4)
where, parameter in (4) determines the level of deviation
of from , and is referred to asstrategic pa-
rameter. Thus, the objective of each GenCo agent would be to
maximizeitsproﬁtlevel ateachroundofbiddingbymod-
ifyingthestrategicparamete r,subjecttopowerconstraints:
(5)
where, istheenergyprice,whichisafunctionofboththe th
GenCo'sstrategicparameter and vector of strategicparameters
of competitors .
ToprovideabaseforindividualGenCo'sself-schedulingbe-
havior,theconceptofRDCisemployed.RDCprovidesamea-
sure of dependence of market status merely based on a single
player'sactionsbyﬁxingthebehaviorofcompetitors.Usingthe
aggregate supply function of the market and the demand level,
each GenCo can construct its individual RDC as discussed in
[35];andsincethebasicassumptioninthispaperisthattheonly
published data to GenCos is the aggregate supply and demand
functionsofthemarketateachr ound,weareabletoemploythe
concept of RDC. Note that RDCcan only be constructed after
the market is cleared; thus, the agents have access to RDCs of
thepreviousroundsofauction.Asapartoftheoptimaldecision
makingprocess,onegoalofthelearningmodelproposedinthis
paperistopredicttheRDCforthefutureroundofbidding.
The RDC of theth agent is a decreasing nonlinear function
of the generated output power. However, in order to be able
to employ RDCs in the agents' belief systems, they have to be
parameterized.Forthatpurpose,simplelinearregressionisused
topresentalinearestimationofRDC,denotedby .
(6)
The slope of linearized RDC is negative .B yi n -
tersecting and ,theapproximateclearingprice
anddispatchedgenerationlevelforthe thagent are
obtained (note that the approximation is due to using a linear
representation for the RDC).
(7)
(8)
By inserting (7) and (8) into (5) and simplifying it, we can
formulate asaqua draticconcavefunctionin .Thevalue
of the strategic variable for theth agent at which the unique
maximum proﬁt level is achieved is denoted by ,
whichalongwith areobtainedbysolving .The
results are as follows:
(9)
(10)
As can be seen from (9), as the sensitivity of the market price
to the actions of theth agent (i.e., approaches zero, the
GenCobecomesaprice-taker,andtherefore, convergesto
zero, resulting in truthful bidding. This is in accordance with
our expectation.
While (9) provides a deterministic relationship between the
optimal value of strategic variable and model parameters, it
cannotbeuseddirectlyforGenCo decisionmaking.Thereason
forthisisthattheactualRDCisnonlinear;thus,usingparame-
tersofitslinearapproximation(i.e., ,and )toobtain ,
leadstoadditionalnumericaler rors.Toovercomethisproblem,
we have introduced the optimal strategic parameter as another
random variable inside the belief system of each agent (refer
to Section III). Numerical experiments show that employing
probabilisticinferencetoobtainestimationsofoptimalvalueof
strategicparameterreducesnu mericalerrorsco nsiderably.
WiththisintroductiononGenCoagents'models,thestep-by-
stepalgorithmperformedseparatelyby each agentisasfollows:
1) After the market is cleared at time:
• Construct the RDC for the latest round of auction
using publicly available aggregate demand and supply
functions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

DEHGHANPOUR et al.:AGENT-BASEDMODELINGINELECTRICALENERGYMARKETSUSINGDYNAMICBAYESI ANNETWORKS 4747
• UsetheconstructedRDCtoobtaintheoptimalvalueof
the strategic parameter by creating a proﬁt curve as a
function of .
• Use linear regression to parameterize the RDC and ob-
tain ,a n d .
• Use the obtained values of ,a n d
system demand at time (denoted by ), to update
agent data history.
• Employ the updated data history and perform SBL to
updatetheDBN-basedbeliefsystem(SectionIII).
2) DA/HA optimal bidding for the future round of market at
time :
• Perform probabilistic particle-based forward sampling
over the DBN-based belief system (Section III) to pre-
dictthevaluesofvariables( ,optimal
,and )forthefutureroundofDA/HA
auction.
• Constructthebiddingfunctionusingthepredictedvalue
for the optimal strategic parameter. Submit the bidding
function to the ISO agent.
We will show that using the procedure above, each agent is
able to maximize its proﬁt in real-time with acceptable errors.
Therefore,thisdistributedsystemof interactivedecisionmakers
approachesa Nash equilibrium (i.e.,each player isable to pre-
dict its best response to competitors).
B. ISO Agent Model
The task of the ISO agent is to perform an optimal gener-
ation resource allocation to supply the electrical demand on
an hour-by-hour basis. Hence, the ISO runs an economic dis-
patchingproblemtomaximizeso cialwelfare(heretominimize
total production cost) based on the received bidding functions
from GenCo agents.
(11)
Inthispaper,theISOagentusesthelambda-iterationmethod
[36] to solve the economic dispatching problem. The inputs
of the ISO agent are GenCo agents' bidding curves and the
real-time electrical demand. Note that the ISO agent does not
haveaccesstoGenCoagents'actualmarginalcostfunctions.As
mentionedearlier,fortheelectri caldemand,actualhourlydata
(normalized by maximum available generation capacity) from
thePJMmarketisemployed[31].Afternormalization,theload
signalisfeddirectlytothe modelinsimulations.
WhentheGenCossubmittheiroffers,theISOsolves(11)for
real-time load to clear the market. Then it publishes (publicly)
theenergyprice,aggregatesuppl ycurve,andreal-timedemand.
DetailsofindividualGenCos'biddingfunctionsarenotexposed
t oc o m p e t i t o r s .S i n c ew eh a v eignored the effects of the trans-
mission system on the energy market, the energy price is the
same for all GenCo agents.
C. DA/HA Bidding Procedures
Note that the bidding process in the market takes place on
twodistinctbutcloselyrelatedtimescales:DAmarketandHA
market. Hence, we need to study the overall behavior of the
energymarketonthesetwoscales.ThemechanismsofHA/DA
stagesofenergymarketshaveb eendescribed in[37]and [38].
Asdemonstratedintheseworks,astheGenCosmovecloserto
real-timetheyneedtocompensatethepowermismatchcreated
bytheerrorsofforecastingtool sintheDAstage.Inthispaper,
westudytheinteractionandeffectsofintroducingtheHAstage
intotheenergymarket,usingtheproposedDBN-baseddecision
making model.
GenCoagentsemploytwoprivatedatabasestokeeptheirbe-
liefsystemsupdated:theDAdatabaseandtheHAdatabase.The
DAdatabaseisdecomposedinto24sections,witheachsection
corresponding to a certain hour in the day. This has been done
because of the high correlation among the load samples with
a 24-hour time difference, which makes the daily load proﬁle
semi-periodic.Hence,decisi onmakingforacertainhourofthe
day in the DA market is based on the data history of thesame
hour on previous days (in this study, up to the past 300 days).
Notethatweekly,seasonal,and annualtrendsofelectricalload
are ignored in this paper. The HA database is composed of the
HA data history of the previous hours of the market up to the
most recent hours.
Ateachhouroftheday,eachGenCoagentsu bmitstwobid-
dingfunctionstothemarket:onebiddingfunctionissubmitted
to participate in the next incoming hour of the same day (i.e.,
HA bidding), and the second bidding function is submitted for
participationintheenergymarketofthatsamehourinthenext
day(i.e.,DAbidding).Notethatthemarketisclearedusingthe
predicted value of the load for each stage.
According to [38], the total amount of payment that theth
GenCo receives in a multistage market (i.e., a market with
both DA and HA stages) is as follows:
(12)
where, ,and arethescheduledpowerofthe th
unitinDA,HA,andrealtimemarkets,respectively; ,
and are theenergy pricescorresponding to these different
stages.Ontheotherhand,thepaymentamountinasingle-stage
market(i.e.,DAstageonly)ismodiﬁedasfollows:
(13)
III. DBN-BASED OPTIMAL DECISION MAKING
Probabilistic graphicalmodels(PGMs) offerusefultools for
representing and analyzing statistical relationships and depen-
dencies among random variables. Bayesian networks, Markov
networks, Hidden Markov Models (HMM), etc. [28] are a few
variationsofPGMsthathavebeenstudiedandusedindifferent
applications. A thorough introduction on PGMs can be found
in [39].
DBNsareacategoryofdirectedPGMsthatareabletocapture
thetemporalevolutionofrandomv ariables;thus,theyareoften
a good ﬁt to model systems with discrete-time stochastic pro-
cesses[28].DBNscanbethoughtofasageneralizationofboth
staticBayesiannetworksandH MMs:whilestaticBayesiannet-
worksareaclassofmultivariatedirectedPGMs,theyareunable
torepresenttime-dependencyof randomvariables,andarecon-
sequentlynotﬁttomodelrandomprocesses.Ontheotherhand,
HMMs are a category of DBNs in which the dynamic nature
of themodelispreserved;however,HMMsareconventionally
best ﬁt to model univariate systems (i.e., one random variable
for the hidden state chain andone for the output chain). DBNs
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

4748 IEEETRANSACTIONSONPOWERSYSTEMS,VOL.31,NO.6,NOVEMBER2016
Fig. 2. DBN-based belief system of GenCo agents.
provide a general framework that address the shortcomings of
static Bayesian networks and HMMs.
WemodelthebeliefsystemofeachGenCousingDBNs.The
belief system embodies each agent's probabilistic perception
of its environment, which is the energy market (including the
competitors,theISOagent,anduncertaindemand).Thus,each
GenCodevelopsaDBN-basedprivatemodelofthemarketand
keepsitupdatedateachtimest ep.TheDBN-basedmodelsare
thenusedbyeachagenttopredictthefuturestateofthemarket
and act accordingly.
ADBNiscomposedofseveralverticesthatrepresentrandom
variables, and directed edges among them, which represent
probabilistic dependencies. A directed edge starts at a parent
vertex and ends in a child vertex (Fig. 2). The parameter of
the model associated with a particular parent-child structure is
equaltotheconditionalprobabilitydistributionfunction(PDF)
of the random variable corresponding to the child node, given
the values of random variables corresponding to its parents.
Also, the DBN spans time to model the temporal changes
in variables (the same as HMM). To develop a DBN-based
model we have to address three issues: structure learning (i.e.,
determining hidden/observable random variables, edges and
theirdirection),parameterlearni ng(i.e.,ﬁndingtheconditional
PDFs corresponding to parent-child structures), and inference
over future events (i.e., prediction).
A. Structure Selection
Since the number of variables considered in the proposed
DBN-basedbeliefsystemislow,thestructureofthemodelisse-
lectedbasedonexperimentsandusingstatisticalmeasuressuch
asmutualinformation(MI).However,ifinfuturedevelopments
ofthemodel,thenumberofvariablesgrowstobelarge,athor-
ough structure learning algorithm should be implemented. The
proposedstructureisdepictedi nFig.2.Ascanbeseen,thepro-
posed DBN is a ﬁrst-order Markov model with four variables
at each time slice. The transition time step can be 1 hour or 24
hours,dependingonthebiddinghorizonbeingHAorDA.This
meansthatforDAbiddingatacertainhourofthefutureday,the
data history of that same hour on previous days are employed.
On the other hand for HA bidding, the data for previous hours
is used as the training set.
Fig. 3. Local parent-child structures within the DBN.
The random variables at each time slice of the belief system
of th agentare: (electricaldemand), (interceptof agent's
linearizedRDCwithpriceaxis), (slopeofagent'slinearized
RDC), and (optimal value of strategic parameter). As
showninFig.2,theelectricaldemandisnotaffectedbymarket
conditions (i.e., price-insensitivity); therefore, the value of
l o a da tt h ef u t u r et i m es l i c eis affected only by
the demand level at present time slot . Note that each
agent employs its private DBN-based belief system in the
decision-making process.
Since to the best of our knowledge, this structure has the
bestperformanceamongthecandidates,andtheGenCosareas-
sumedtoberationalagents(i.e.,thechancesofmakingmistakes
areignored),allGenCoswillusethesamestructurefordecision
making.
B. Parameter Learning
Nowthatthestructureofthegraphicalmodelisselected,the
problem of parameterization should be addressed. Each local
parent-child structure of the DBN (Fig. 3) represents a condi-
tional PDF that has to be determined online. Note that all of
thevariablesofthemodelareconsideredtobecontinuous;that
is,tomaintainmodelprecisionan davoiddifﬁcultiespertaining
to discretization, we keep the original continuous nature of the
system.
As mentioned previously, Sparse Bayesian Learning (SBL)
[40] is employed to parametrize the DBN-based belief system.
Thus, when the database of the agents are updated (i.e., when
ISO publishes data to agents), SBL is applied to each of the
localstructuresinFig.3,fortheindividualbeliefsystemofeach
separateagenttokeeptheoverallbeliefsystemsupdated.
SBLisakernel-basedlearning algorithmwhichisalsoknown
as“relevancevectormachine”[4 0].ThegoalinSBListocalcu-
latetheweightsofthekernelfunctions,whichforthisprojectare
selectedtobeGaussians.AgreatadvantageofSBLisits“spar-
sity”—only a subset of kernels have non-zero weights. As the
learningprocessevolves,anincreasingnumberofkernelstend
to have weights with practicallyzero value. Therefore, using a
pruningoperation,wecanomitthekernelsthatarenotrelevant
to the learning process. The deletion of irrelevant kernels is a
mechanismwithinSBL thatpreventsoverﬁtting.
Given our training set in which is the set of
explanatoryvariables(i.e.,parents)and isthetargetvariable
(i.e., child variable), the kernel-based representation of target
variable is shown below:
(14)
Here 's are the weights of the kernel functions ,
and is a noise process, which is assumed to be a zero mean
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

DEHGHANPOUR et al.:AGENT-BASEDMODELINGINELECTRICALENERGYMARKETSUSINGDYNAMICBAYESI ANNETWORKS 4749
Gaussian process with variance . Using this model, the ob-
jectiveofSBListoestimatetheweightsofthekernelfunctions
and the variance of the noise process. Note that the likelihood
of the dataset can be written as a Gaussian function (since we
haveassumedthatthedistributionofnoiseisGaussian):
(15)
where is called the design matrix:
...
...
...
...
... (16)
The prior distributions over the weights are selected to be
independent zero-mean Gaussians:
(17)
where, is the vector of hyperparameters, and is equal to the
setofinversevariancesofthekernelweights.As getslarger
andlargerduringthelearningprocess,thecorrespondingkernel
function gets more and more irrelevant and can be eliminated.
To make predictions, we will be needing the posterior of the
unknown parameters and hyperparameters given the observed
targetvector.Theposteriorisdecomposedusingthechainrule,
as follows:
(18)
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side of (18) is the posterior
distributionovertheweightsand canbecalculatedanalytically.
Using Bayes rule, the posterior is formulated into a Gaussian
distribution with covariance matrix and mean vector [40].
Thesecondtermontherighthandsideof(18)can bereplaced
with a delta function that is nonzero only at the most prob-
able values for the hyperparameters ( and ). Values
of and havebeencalculatedusi ngexpectation-maxi-
mization-basedrecursiveestima tions,tomaximizethemarginal
likelihoodfunction(differentu pdaterulesarediscussedin[40].)
Thus, the parameter of a local structure in the DBN-based be-
lief system with child variable , and its parents is a
Gaussian distribution,obtained as follows:
(19)
C. Inference
After the conclusion of the learning procedure at each time
step, the agents perform probabilistic inference over variables
of a future time slice. In other words, they predict the future
stateofthemarkettoestimatetheoptimalvalueofthestrategic
variableforthefutureroundofauction(nexthourornextday).
Inthispaper,inferenceisaccomplishedusingaparticle-based
forward sampling method [39]. The values of the variables at
the current time slice are initialized as evidence (primary par-
ticles). Then, using the learned model parameters (i.e., condi-
tional PDFs) we move along the directed edges of the DBN to
obtainparticlesofthefutureti meslice.Thisprocessisrepeated
500 times. The mean of obtained particles is used as the pre-
dicted values for the variables in the future time slice. When
Fig. 4. GenCo's agent-based model.
theGenCosobtainanestimationof throughprob-
abilistic inference, they modifytheir bidding function accord-
ingly and submit it to the ISO agent.
D. The Decision Making Process
The DBN-based decision making process involves the two
functionalitiesoflearningandpre diction(i.e.,inference).Upon
receiving the latest data samples from the most recent round
of auction, ﬁrst, each agent updates the conditional probability
densityfunctionscorrespondingtoparent-childstructuresofthe
DBNs, employing SBL. These updated conditional PDFs rep-
resent the statistical afﬁnities among the variables (i.e.,
,a n d ). The ﬁnal goal of the decision making problem is
to ﬁnd or estimate the optimal course of action for the future
round of auction, at the HA or the DA look-ahead windows.
Hence, the updated conditional PDFs are used to achieve this
goal. Given the latest samples for the variables at the current
timestep,thefuturesamplesforth evariablesareextractedusing
aforwardsamplingmethod,employingthelearnedconditional
PDFs. Considering the structure of the DBN (Fig. 2), the cur-
rentsamplesofvariables serveasinputstothedecision
makingprocessandareusedtogeneratethepredictedsamples
for the same variables. Finally, the predicted samples for the
inputvariables(attime )areemployedtoestimatetheop-
timal course of action for the incoming round of auction (i.e.,
strategicparameter, ).Thesamplingprocessisperformedre-
peatedly,asexplainedintheprevioussubsection,andthemean
of the samples for the strategic parameter, ,i su s e da st h e
forecastedoptimalaction,whichdeterminesthedeviationfrom
the marginal cost curve when bidding in the market. The al-
gorithmic overview of the overall decision making process is
presented in Section II of the paper. The agent-based decision
makingprocessisillustratedinFig.4,foroneGenCoagent.
IV. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS ANDRESULTS
The proposed decision making model is tested in MATLAB
environmentforfourtestcases:twogenericsystemswith5and
15 GenCo agents, corresponding to energy markets with high
andlowmarketshareconcentration,andtwoIEEEbenchmarks
(9-busand30-bussystems).BothHAandDAbiddingschemes
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

4750 IEEETRANSACTIONSONPOWERSYSTEMS,VOL.31,NO.6,NOVEMBER2016
are implemented in all the test cases. Thus, the behavior of the
proposed model on different time scales and different market
concentration levels is studied.
After the market is cleared, real-time optimal values of
strategic parameters of each agent are obtained using real time
RDC for each GenCo. The results are then compared with
DBN-based DA/HA predictions to assess the performance of
the decision making model.
A. Case Study I
Considering an HA bidding scheme for the system with 5
agents (cost parameters given in Table II, Appendix I), the
optimal real-time value of strategic parameter for one of the
agents is depicted in Fig. 5(a), along with its DBN-based
estimation. As can be seen, theDBN-based estimation fol-
lows the real-time optimal value with satisfactory precision
(mean absolute error (MAE) of 3.83%). This implies that the
DBN-based belief system can be employed for prediction of
the result of HA market and optimal acting accordingly. Also,
the results of the prediction of the other three variables of the
belief system and their real-time values are
shown in Fig. 5(b), (c), and (d), respectively. The MAE level
of predictions forthese variables are below 3%.
The rest of the GenCo agents in the system show similar
performance. As the real-time average optimal value of the
strategicparameterapproach eszero,theMAE increases(since
the error normalizer tends to shrink to near zero values). This
implies that, for agents that are not exercising market power
(i.e.,notangibledeviationfrommarginalcost),theDBN-based
decision making procedure becomes less reliable. However,
practically the average error values of prediction for all
the agents are similar and around $0.3/MWh.
Since the actions of all the agents are nearly optimal, the
systemapproachesNE.Thus,th eDBN-basedbeliefsystemen-
ables the GenCos to predict the real-time market equilibrium
and modifytheir actions tomaximize their proﬁt.
B. Case Study II
The decision making model is also tested on the 15-agent
system for a DA bidding scheme (cost parameters given in
TableII,AppendixI).Asmenti onedbefore,forDAbiddingon
a certain hour of the next day, the agents use the data history
of the same hour on previous days to train their DBN-based
private belief systems. Hence, each agent has 24 DBNs cor-
responding to each hour of the day. In Fig. 6(a), the result
of prediction of is presented for one of the agents, on a
certain hour of the day. The spikes on the curve correspond
to an increase in the DA load proﬁle for that hour of the day
(Fig. 6(b)). This implies that,as the demand increases, the
GenCo's incentive to deviate from its marginal cost curve
grows. The proﬁt proﬁle of the agent is depicted in Fig. 6(c).
As shown here, the DBN-based strategic bidding leads to an
increaseinthereal-timeproﬁt levelandapproximatelyreaches
t h er e a l - t i m em a x i m u mp o s s i b l ep r o ﬁ t .T h eD B N - b a s e dD A
demand prediction outcome is shown in Fig. 6(b). Compared
to HA load estimation with MAE of 2.34%, the MAE level of
DA load forecasting increases to 7%.
Here again, all the agents show similar performance in
prediction and decision-making; and since each agent is maxi-
mizingitsproﬁtatthesametimewithacceptableprecision,the
Fig. 5. Comparing the outcome of the DBN-based decision making with op-
timal real-time outcome of the market for one GenCo agent (HA bidding—
system with 5 agents). (a) Strategic parameter, (b) Alpha parameter, (c) Beta
parameter, (d) Actual demand level.
DBN-baseddistributeddecision-makinghasledthemultiagent
system to approach its NE.
C. Case Study III
The proposed decision making model is tested on the IEEE
9-bussystem(consistingofthreeagents),asillustratedinFig.7.
ThecostdataforthethreeGenCoagentsinthissystemarepro-
videdintheAppendixI[41].Theﬁnaloutputvariable(i.e.,the
strategic parameter) of the DBN for one of the agents of this
system (with /MWh, /MWh ,a n d
MW)asafunctionoftimeisdepictedinFig.8.TheMAE
levelis4.95%and11.24%fortheHAandDAlook-aheadtimes,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

DEHGHANPOUR et al.:AGENT-BASEDMODELINGINELECTRICALENERGYMARKETSUSINGDYNAMICBAYESI ANNETWORKS 4751
Fig. 6. Comparing the outcome of the DBN-based decision making with
optimal real-time outcome of the market for one GenCo agent (DA bidding—
system with 15 agents). (a) Strategic parameter, (b) Actual demand level,
(c) Proﬁt level.
Fig. 7. Structure of IEEE 9-bus system.
Fig. 8. Comparing the outcome of DBN-based decision making with optimal
real-timevaluesofthemarketforoneagentinIEEE9-bussystem.
TABLE I
DETAILS OF THEDECISION MAKING PROCESS
Fig. 9. Structure of IEEE 30-bus system [42].
respectively.NotethatFig.8showstheoptimalcourseofaction
to be taken by the agent at each time step for the HA and DA
cases. Hence, the agent determines its bidding function based
on the predicted value of the strategic parameter at each time
step. To further clarify the decision making process, we have
shown the samples of the variables for the agent in Table I, at
handpredictionsfor h.Thesamplesat
time areusedforupdatingtheDBN andforecastingthevalues
ofthevariablesattime .Theactualvaluesofthevariables
at time are given in the last row of the table. As can be
seen, the HA predicted values for time are close to their
actualreal-timevaluesthatareobtainedaftermarketclearance
at that speciﬁc time.
D. Case Study IV
The DBN-based decision making scheme is implemented
on the IEEE 30-bus system, shown in Fig. 9; the data for the
system is given in [42]. The cost parameters of the generators
(GenCos) are given in Table II, Appendix I [43]. In Fig. 10(a),
and Fig. 10(b) the results of the DBN-based prediction of the
strategic parameter for the DA and HA stages are shown, for
one of the agents. The MAE of estimation is 10% and 15%
for the HA and DA markets, respectively. Note that while the
MAE has increased compared to the previous two test cases
(due to lower mean value of strategic parameter), the absolute
value of the error is in the same range (around $0.1/MWh to
$0.3/MWh).Asexpected,theaccu racyoftheDBN-baseddeci-
sionmakingprocedureintheHA stagehasimprovedcompared
totheDAstage.Theotherﬁveag entsshowsimilaraccuracyin
estimatingtheiroptimalst rategicbiddingfunctions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

4752 IEEETRANSACTIONSONPOWERSYSTEMS,VOL.31,NO.6,NOVEMBER2016
Fig.10. ComparingtheoutcomeoftheDBN-baseddecisionmakingwithop-
timalreal-time outcomeofthemarketfor oneGenCo agent(DA andHA mar-
kets—IEEE30-bussystem).(a)Strategicparameter(DA),(b)Strategicpa ram-
eter (HA).
E. Comparing the DA and HA Bidding Schemes
Since the uncertainty pertaining to load prediction is dimin-
ished in the HA decision-making, the equilibrium of the HA
market is Pareto superior for the GenCos,compared to the DA
market.Thus,theGenCoscanma ke additionalproﬁtbymodi-
fyingtheirDAbiddingfunctionsontheHAstage(astheymove
closer to real-time dispatching). We have compared the proﬁt
levels of theGenCo agents in case studiesI and IV for theDA
and markets. In the 5-agent system of case study I,
an average annual proﬁt level growth of $90,000 is observed
for each agent in the market, compared to the DA
market.
The results of the simulation in the forth case study (IEEE
30-bus system) show that introducing the HA stage into the
marketleadstomorestableandlessvolatileprices,asdepicted
inFig.11.Also,theHAstagereducesthevolatilityoftheproﬁt
streams of the GenCos. Compared to the single-stage market
(i.e.,DAonly),themeantotalproﬁtoftheagentsforthemulti-
stagecase hasincreasedfrom$8,800to$10,000in
a period of 60 hours. Hence, a multistage procedure is capable
ofdecreasingtheriskandimprovingthestabilityoftheenergy
market.
F . Market Power Analysis
As the number of competing GenCos grow (keeping the
total generation capacity ﬁxed), the average share of each
GenCo, i.e., market concentration (which is measured by
Hirschmann-Herﬁndahl Index (HHI)) falls [38]. In our study,
the value of HHI for the 5-agent system is 0.2, while it drops
to 0.072 when the number of GenCos increases to 15. On
the other hand, the average value of the optimal strategic pa-
rameter decreases from $1.886/MWh, to $0.835/MWh, as the
numberofGenCosgrowsfrom5to15;thisindicatesadropin
Fig.11. Comparingtheenergypriceinsingle-stageandmultistageenergy mar-
kets (IEEE 30-bus system).
Fig.12. Comparingenergypricesinsystemswith5and15agents.
Fig. 13. Sensitivity of an agent's market power to inelastic electrical demand
level.
GenCos'incentivetoexercisemarketpower.InFig.12,energy
prices of the 5-agent and 15-agent systems are compared. In
addition to an increase in average price in the 5-agent system
($32.95/MWh compared to $16.44/MWh for the 15-agent
system), the standard deviation of the energy price has also
grown($2.37/MWh,comparedto$1.24/MWhforthe15-agent
system), suggesting higher price volatility for the system with
lower number of GenCos. Thus, the model conﬁrms the ex-
pecteddropinmarketpowerexerciseasthenumberofGenCos
grow. Also, in both systems, the average correlation level of
electricaldemandandtheoptimals trategicvariableishighand
almost the same (0.729 in the 15-agent system, and 0.765 in
the 5-agent model). The scatter diagram of optimal strategic
parameter and electrical demand for one of the GenCos in the
IEEE 30-bus system is shown in Fig. 13. The cost parameters
of this agent are: /MWh, /MWh ,
and MW,asshowninTableIIintheAppendix.As
expected, an increase in electrical demand results in excessive
market power exercise by GenCos.
The agent-based model shows two sources of volatility
in the energy market: the errors in load forecasting, and the
low number of GenCo agents. While the former is caused by
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

DEHGHANPOUR et al.:AGENT-BASEDMODELINGINELECTRICALENERGYMARKETSUSINGDYNAMICBAYESI ANNETWORKS 4753
limitation of forecasting tools in containing the uncertainty of
thesystem(asshownincomparingsingle-stageandmultistage
markets),thelattercorresponds todirectmarketpowerexercise
by dominant ﬁrms in the market.
V. CONCLUSION
Inthispaper,anagent-basedoptimaldecisionmakingtoolis
designedusingdynamicBayesiannetworks.Employingsparse
Bayesianlearning,eachagenttra insitsprivatebeliefsystemto
predicttheoptimalcourseofact iontobetakeninfuturerounds
ofthemarket.Thisdistributeddecision-makingmodelistested
inMATLABonmarketswithhighandlowshareconcentrations
(5 and 15 GenCos) and on two distinct time scales (HA/DA).
Also, the model was tested on two IEEE benchmarks (9-bus
and30-bussystems).Numericalresultsshowthat,byusingthe
proposed decision making model, the agents are able to pre-
dict themarket equilibrium in advance, with acceptable errors.
Thus,basedontheproposedprobabilisticmodel,themultiagent
system approaches Nash equilibrium through distributed de-
cision-making under incomplete information. The DBN-based
belief system can be expanded easily to model more complex
decision-making situations.
APPENDIX I
COST DATA FORGENCO AGENTS OFCASE STUDIES
TABLE II
DATA FORCASE STUDIES
REFERENCES
[1] T. Li and M. Shahidehpour, “Strategic bidding of transmission-con-
strained GENCOs with incomplete information,”IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 437–447, Feb. 2005.
[2]J.D.W eberandT.J.Overbye,“At wo-leveloptimizationproblemfor
analysisofmarketbiddingstrategies,”in Proc. IEEE Power Eng. Soc.
Summer Meeting,Jul.18–22,1999,vol.2,pp.682–687.
[ 3 ]Z .Q .L u o ,J .S .P a n g ,a n dD .R a l p h, Mathematical Programs With
Equilibrium Constraints . New York, NY: Cambridge Univ. Press,
1996.
[4] S.A.Gabriel,A.J.Conejo,J.D.Fuller,B.F.Hobbs,andC.Ruiz , Com-
plementarity Modeling in Energy Markets. NewYork,NY:Springer,
2013.
[5] M.E.KhodayarandM.Shahidehpour,“Optimalstrategiesformultiple
participants in electricity markets,”IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 29,
no. 2, pp. 986–987, Mar. 2014.
[6] B.F.Hobbs,C.B.Metzler,andJ.S.Pang,“Strategicgaminganalysis
forelectricpowersystems:AnMPEC approach,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 15,no.2, pp. 638–645, May 2000.
[7] E.G.Kardakos,C.K.Simoglou,andA.G.Bakirtzis,“Short-termelec-
tricity market simulation for pool-based multi-period auctions,”IEEE
Trans. Power Syst.,vol.28,no.3,pp.2526–2535,Aug.2013.
[8] X.HuandD.Ralph,“UsingEPECstomodelbi-levelgamesinrestruc-
turedelectricitymarketswithlocationalprices,” Oper. Res.,vol.5,no.
5, pp. 809–827, Sep. 2007.
[9] M.V.Pereira,S.Granville,M.H.C.Fampa,R.Dix,andL.A.Barrsos,
“Strategic bidding under uncertainty: A binary expansion approach,”
IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,vol.20,no.1,pp.180–188,Feb.2005.
[10] A. G. Bakirtzis, N. P. Ziogos, A. C. Tellidou, and G. A. Bakirtzis,
“Electricity producer offering strategies in day-ahead energy market
with step-wise offers,”IEEE Trans. Power Syst. ,v o l .2 2 ,n o .4 ,p p .
1804–1818, Nov. 2007.
[11] G. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Gao, and J. Lu, “Competitive strategic bid-
ding optimization in electricity markets using bi-level programming
and swarm technique,”IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 58, no. 6, pp.
2138–2146, Jun. 2011.
[12] I. Atzeni, L. O. Ordonez, G. Scutari, D. P. Palomar, and J. R. Fonol-
losa, “Noncooperative day-ahead bidding strategies for demand-side
expected cost minimization with real-time adjustment: A GNEP ap-
proach,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 2397–2412,
May 1, 2014.
[13] J.Y.WeiandY.Smeers,“Spatialoligopolisticelectricitymodelswi th
Cournotgeneratorsandregulatedtransmissionprices,” Oper. Res.,vol.
47, no. 1, pp. 102–112, 1999.
[14] M.Kazemi,B.Mohammadi-Ivatloo,andM.Ehsan,“Risk-constrained
strategic bidding of GenCos considering demand response,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst.,vol.30,no.1,pp.376–384,Jan.2015.
[15] Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, and H. Chen, “Computing all Nash equi-
libria of multiplayer games in electricity markets by solving polyno-
mial equations,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 81–91,
Feb. 2012.
[16] A. Weidlich and D. Veit, “A critical survey of agent-based whole-
sale electricity market models,” Energy Econ. ,v o l .3 0 ,n o .4 ,p p .
1728–1759, 2008.
[17] J.BowerandD.W.Bunn,“Model-basedcomparisonsofpoolandbi-
lateralmarkets forelectricity,” Energy J.,pp.1–29,2000.
[18] V.Nanduri andT.K.Das,“Areinforcementlearningmodeltoassess
marketpowerunderauction-basedenergypricing,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 22,no. 1, pp. 85–95, Feb. 2007.
[19] V. Nanduri and I. Saavedra-Antonilez, “A competitive Markov deci-
sionprocessmodelfortheenergy-water-climatechangenexus,” Appl.
Energy, vol. 111, pp. 186–198, Nov. 2013.
[20] J.J. Sanchez, D. W. Bunn, E. Centeno, and J. Barquin, “Dynamics in
forward and spot electricity markets,”IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol.
24, no. 2, pp. 582–591, May 2009.
[21] A. Banal-Estanol and A. R. Micola, “Behavioural simulations in spot
electricity markets,”Eur. J. Oper. Res. , vol. 214, no. 1, pp. 147–159,
Oct. 2011.
[ 2 2 ]N .P .Y u ,C .C .L i u ,a n dJ .P r i c e ,“ E v a l u a t i o no fm a r k e tr u l e su s i n ga
multi-agent system method,”IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,vol.25,no.1,
pp. 470–479, Feb. 2010.
[23] M. Shaﬁe-khah and J. P. S. Catalao, “A stochastic multi-layer agent-
based model to study electricity market participants behavior,”IEEE
Trans. Power Syst.,vol.30,no.2,pp.867–881,Mar.2015.
[24] M.Shaﬁe-khah,M.P.Moghaddam,andM.K.Sheikh-El-Eslami,“De-
velopment of a virtual power market model to investigate strategic
andcollusivebehaviorofmarketplayers,” Energy Policy,vol.61,pp.
717–728, Oct. 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

4754 IEEETRANSACTIONSONPOWERSYSTEMS,VOL.31,NO.6,NOVEMBER2016
[25] M. Mahvi and M. M. Ardehali, “Optimal bidding strategy in a com-
petitive electricity market based on agent-based approach and numer-
icalsensitivityanalysis,” Energy,vol.36,no.11,pp.6367–6374,Nov.
2011.
[26] R.S.SuttonandG.B.Andrew , Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc-
tion. Cambridge,MA,USA:MITPress,1998,vol.1,no.1.
[27] L. Fan, J. Wang, R. Jiang, and Y. Guan, “Min-max regret bidding
strategy for thermal generator considering price uncertainty,”IEEE
Trans. Power Syst.,vol.29,no.5,pp.2169–2179,Sep.2014.
[28] K. P. Murphy, “Dynamic Bayesian networks: Representation, infer-
enceandlearning,”Ph.D.dissertatio n,Univ.California,Berkeley,CA,
USA, 2002.
[29] M. Ventosa, A. Baillo, A. Ramos, and M. Rivier, “Electricity market
modeling trends,” Energy Policy, vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 897–913, 2005.
[30] A. G. Petoussis, X. P. Zhang, S. G. Petoussis, and K. R. Gofrey, “Pa-
rameterization of linear supply functions in nonlinear AC electricity
marketequilibriummodels—PartI:Literaturereviewandequilibrium
algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,vol.28,no.2,pp.650–658,May
2013.
[31] “PJMmarketdata,”[Online].Available:http://www.pjm.com.
[32] G.Aneiros,J.M.Vilar,R.Cao,andA.M.S.Roque,“Functionalpre-
diction for residual demand in electricity spot markets,”IEEE Trans.
Power Syst.,vol.28,no.4,pp.4201–4208,Nov.2013.
[33] A. Baillo, M. Ventosa, M. Rivier, and A. Ramos, “Optimal offering
strategies for generation companies operating in electricity spot
markets,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 745–753,
May 2004.
[34] F. Wen and A. K. David, “Optimal bidding strategies and modeling
ofimperfectinformationamongcompetitivegenerators,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst.,vol.16,no.1,pp.15–21,Feb.2001.
[35] S. Vazquez, P. Rodilla, and C. Batlle, “Residual demand models for
strategicbiddinginEuropeanpowerexchanges:revisitingthemethod-
ology in the presence of a large penetration of renewables,”Electr.
Power Syst. Res.,vol.108, pp.178–184,2014.
[36] A. J. Wood and B.F. Wollenberg, Power Generation, Operation, and
Control. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,1996.
[37] A. Botterud, Z. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Sumaili, H. Keko, J. Mendes, R.
J. Bessa, and V. Miranda, “Demand dispatch and probabilistic wind
power forecasting in unit commitment and economic dispatch: A
case study of Illinois,”IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol.4,no. 1,pp.
250–261, Jan. 2013.
[38] D. R. Biggar and M. R. Hesamzadeh, The Economics of Electricity
Markets. New York, NY,USA: Wiley, 2014.
[39] D. Koller and N. Friedman, Probabilistic Graphical Models: Princi-
ples and Techniques. Cambridge,MA,USA:MITPress,2009.
[40] M.E.Tipping,“SparseBayesianlearningandtherelevancevectorma-
chine,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,vol.1,pp.211–244,2001.
[41] Y.Liu,H.Xin,Z.Qu,andD.Gan,“Adistributedsolutiontoreal-time
economic dispatch problem under power ﬂow congestion,” inProc.
2015 IEEE Power and Energy Soc. General Meeting ,2015,pp.1–5.
[42] “IEEE30-bussystemdata,”[Online].Available:http://www.al-roo mi.
org/component/content/article?id=25:30-bus-system.
[43] “CostparametersforGenCoagentsoftheIEEE30-bussystem,”[On-
line].Available:http://een.iust.ac.ir/profs/jadid/SCPM.pdf.
Kaveh Dehghanpour (S’14) received the B.S. and
M.S.degreesfromtheUniver sityofTehran,Tehran,
Iran,in2011,and2013,respectively.Heiscurrently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in the Electrical and
ComputerEngineeringDepartmentatMontanaState
University, Bozeman, MT,USA. His research inter-
ests include electrical energy markets, multi-agent
systems, and machine learning.
M. Hashem Nehrir (S’68–M’71–SM’89–F’10–LF’
13) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA, in 1
969, 1971, and 1978, respectively, all in electrical
engineering.
HeisaProfessorwiththeDepartmentofElectrical
and Computer Engineering,Montana State Univer-
sity, Bozeman, MT, USA. His research interests in-
clude modeling and control of power systems, alter-
native energy power generation systems, and appli-
cationofintelligentcontrolstopowersy stems.Heis
the author of three textbooks and an authoror coauthor of numerous technical
papers.
John W. Sheppard (M’86–SM’97–F’07)re ceiveda
B.S. in Computer Science from Southern Methodist
University in 1983 and an M.S. and Ph.D. in Com-
puterSciencefromJohnsHopkins Universityin1990
and 1997 respectively.
HeisaCollegeofEngineeringDi stinguishedPro-
fessorofComputerScienceatM ontanaStateUniver-
s i t y .H ei sa l s oa nA d j u n c tP r o fessor in the Depart-
mentofComputerScienceatJo hnsHopkinsUniver-
sity. He performs research inprobabilistic graphical
m o d e l s ,B a y e s i a nm e t h o d s ,distributed evolutionary
optimization, and integrated system health management.
Nathan C. Kelly (S’14)receivedtheB.Sc.degreein
electrical engineering from Michigan State Univer-
sity,EastLansing,MI ,USA,in2009.Heiscurrently
workingtowardstheM .Sc.degreeinelectricalengi-
neering at MontanaState University, Bozeman, MT,
USA.
His research interests are in renewable power
systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
