Procedia Computer Science   19  ( 2013 )  841 – 846 
1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of Elhadi M. Shakshuki
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2013.06.112 
The 2nd International Workshop on Agent-Based Mobility, Traffic and Transportation         
Models, Methodologies and Applications (ABMTRANS) 
Agent-based housing market microsimulation for integrated land use, 
transportation, environment model system 
Adam Rosenfielda, Franco Chingcuancob, Eric J. Millerc* 
aDivision of Engineering Science, University of Toronto, 40 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 2E4 
bDept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA, 02139  
cDept. of Civil Engineering, University of Toronto, 35 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 1A4 
 
Abstract 
The Housing Market Evolutionary System (HoMES) is the updated housing market module for the Integrated Land Use, 
Transportation, Environment (ILUTE) model system. HoMES is a disaggregate, agent-based microsimulation of the owner-
, location choices and valuations,  the 
endogenous supply of housing by type and location, and the endogenous determination of sale prices and rents. The new model 
offers significant improvements over previous attempts by including a reformulated market clearing mechanism, market 
dependency on macro-economic conditions, and improved computational performance. A 100% synthesized population is validated 
against historical data for the Greater Toronto-Hamilton Area. 
 
© 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of [name organizer] 
 
Keywords: microsimulation; market; disequilibrium; housing; integrated model; agent-based, ILUTE 
 
1. Introduction 
The ILUTE (Integrated Land Use, Transportation, Environm ent) model system is an agent-based microsimulation 
model that evolves an urban  spatial form, demographics, travel behavior and economic structure over time. 
An operational prototype of ILUTE has been developed fo r the Greater Toronto-Hamilton Area (GTHA), simulating 
the evolution of a synthesized population over a twenty-year timespan (1986-2006).   
  
The model system uses a dynamic population of agents (individuals, households, firms, etc.) that are endogenously 
evolved as the simulation progresses. Recently, there ha s been much progress towards developing the ILUTE 
Demographic Updating Module (I-DUM), which updates socio-demographic attributes throughout the simulation. I-
DUM has received comprehensive testing, including historical validation over a twenty-year period [1]. Current efforts 
have focused on ling component, specifically the owner-occupied housing market 
 [2] [3]; the 
endogenous supply of housing by type an d location [4]; and the endogenous determi nation of sale prices and rents [5]. 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: 416-978-4076; fax: 416-978-5054. 
E-mail address: miller@civ.utoronto.ca. 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of Elhadi M. Shakshuki
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

842   Adam Rosenﬁ  eld et al.  /  Procedia Computer Science   19  ( 2013 )  841 – 846 
This component, in tandem with automobile ownership, la bor force and firmographic models, serves as a key input for
modeling transportation demand.
housing market modul e. It is a complete microsimulation of urban housing market dynamics, with new models for
market demand, price formation, as well as a bid-auction process on a fully disaggregate level. A framework of the
new implementation is discussed in comparison to previous modeling efforts, and preliminary results are presented.
2. HoMES Overview
Various processes in ILUTE employ either a pric e-taking or pric e-formation mark et fram ework a s a m eans of 
matching supply and demand agent s [5]. The labor, marriage, and rental housing markets are all examples of pric e-
taking markets, whereby prices are s et prior to the market clearing proces s. In the case of marriage, no such 
exists, but the process can otherwise be modeled through the concept of supply and demand agents [6].
The owner-occupied housing market is, conversely, a price-formation market in which buyers bid the amounts they 
are willing to pay and sellers ch oose among the bids they recei ve. The housing market is updated in monthly tim e-
steps, where individual dwelling units are listed on or w ithdrawn from the market and are cleared in an auctio n-type
as there is no requirement 
for all supply and demand ag ents to clear at each step . Rather, homes may remain vacant should an acceptable bid not 
be received, and potential buyers may remain active in the market for several months at a tim e. Market dynamics are 
thus affected by the micro -level decisions of agents, as well as by the macroscopic impacts of excesses or deficiencies
in either supply or demand.
Market entry for demand agents (i.e. households) aris es from (a) the decision of an existing househol d t o seek 
relocation, or (b) the formation of a new household seeking residenc e. Existing households may choose to enter the
market by means of the Residential Mobility Model , while new households are formed as a result of the Demographic 
Updating Module. Either process results in a household entering the market demand pool . A binary choice model the n 
determines whether the household will search in the rental or owner-occupied market.
Supply agents, namely dwellings, also enter the market through two diff erent means: (a) the dwelling of an actively
searching household may be put up on the market once th at household decides to begin its search, or (b) a new
dwelling may be constructed and listed on the market by its developer. 
Figure 1. Framework of housing market supply, demand and clearing mechanisms.
NeN
N w Buili
i tl
l SpS
S ace
Zoning
Interest rates
Demogo rapa hic UpU
U dad
d tet
t
New household fof
f rmation
Household dissolution
Market Agent
Vacancies
Prices
Choice set
fof
f rmation Auction Agent upu dates
Residential Mobility Decision
Household composition
EEmpplloyymentt chhangges
Neighborhood characteristics
Supply
Type
Location
SSiizzee
Market valuation
Demand
Decision to become
active in market
TTenure chhoiice: rentt or
own

843 Adam Rosenﬁ  eld et al.  /  Procedia Computer Science   19  ( 2013 )  841 – 846 
Following market entry, the clearing process takes place whereby:  
1. Sellers determine their asking prices based on their perceived value of their dwelling. 
2. Buyers form their choice sets of potential dwellings. 
3. Auctions take place for the active dwellings in the current time-step. 
 
Agents may exit the market by either completing a successful transaction or withdrawing from the auction. In either 
case, the market agent will then assign the appropriate linkage s and update the bidder and seller pools. An overview of 
market processes is shown in Figure 1. 
3. Module Components 
3.1. Market Entry 
The determinants of residential mobility can be interpreted through the concept of residential stressors [7]. Various 
atisfaction for its current 
dwelling against alternatives; this difference in perceived satisfaction is defined as stress. Residential stress evolves 
ons 
resulting in push or pull forces towards moving. Life-c ycle events occurring through I-DUM such as marriage, 
childbirth and divorce all contribute to increased likelihood of residential mobility and are thus important factors to be 
considered in a mobility model. A mixed-logit model developed by Habib [3] quantifies the effect of various 
residential stressors on . These stressors include: changes in employment 
(e.g., gains/losses/changes of jobs), changes in family co mposition (e.g., childbirth, moving out, aging), duration in 
current dwelling, and spatiotemporal economic data. 
 
If a household decides to enter the housing market, the factors that trig ger its mobility later become determinants of 
its choice set of dwelling alternatives. This forms an im portant linkage between residential stressors and location 
choice. This is of particular significance since the tenure decision (rental or owner-occupied housing), which directly 
impacts the supply and demand numbers for the owner-occu pied market, has been shown to be dependent on a 
-cycle phase, as well as the macroeconomic climate in which it resides [8]. Furthermore, this decision 
has also been found to be highly correlated to the previous tenure of a household: renters frequently choose to become 
homeowners, while the inverse is relatively uncommon. Other significant explanatory factors include household size 
and gross income, both of which are positively correlated to a higher propensity of homeownership.  
3.2. Property Valuation 
Upon market entry, each seller determines a price at which to list its house, with the asking price serving two 
purposes: firstly, it narrows the set of potential bidders, wh o have preconceived financial search constraints; secondly, 
it acts as a benchmark for dwelling utility calculations which form the basis of the market clearing mechanism. The 
asking price model has been updated to better incorporate the set of factors that have been found to affect list prices. 
These include physical dwelling attributes such as size and structural type. Also  included are several macroeconomic 
indicators, namely unemployment, fuel prices and mortgage rates , all of which were found to be strong predictors of 
future housing market performance. 
 
The most powerful predictor of future prices, however,  is through historical trends. The new valuation model 
accounts for the results of previous endogenous housing mark et interactions, thus forming a longitudinal link between 
. Aggregate market trends such as supply-demand imbalances will affect prices, as will an 
. For example, a home that has lingered on the market for several months will tend 
to drop its asking price. By integrating the dwelling valu ation model within the ILUTE system, the interdependencies 
between economic growth and housing market performa nce can be captured while allowing for exogenous 
macroeconomic indicators to influence market dynamics. 
3.3. Location Choice 
While the seller seeks to maximize profit, the homebuyer is seeking to maximize his or her utility attained by 
purchasing a new home. Although the buyer is seeking an optimal solution 
constraints preclude the searcher from considering all possible dwelling alternatives. Thus, a confined choice set forms

844   Adam Rosenﬁ  eld et al.  /  Procedia Computer Science   19  ( 2013 )  841 – 846 
(1) 
(2) 
the sample space for each potential transactio n. In this sense, buyers and sellers have a myopic approach to the market 
whereby only limited information about each agent is kno wn to others. Prospective buyers only have detailed 
information on dwellings in their choice set, and sellers ar e similarly unaware of the actions of other sellers. As such, 
it is imperative that the choice set formation model accurately represent the preferences of each  household as all 
subsequent market clearing processes depend on an appropriate selection of homes. 
 
Of all the mechanics of the housing market, the choice set pr oblem is possibly the most difficult to model, owing to 
the inherent subjectivity associated with how househ olds choose potential homes. Young [9] proposed an elimination-
by-aspects 
important attributes are first used to eli minate alternatives, followed by successively less important traits. This is in 
contrast to traditional residential lo cation models, which assume a trade-
attribute and its satisfaction for another [10]. An EBA approa ch simplifies the choice set restriction while more closely 
capturing the decision process of individuals who seldom  consider all attributes of a an alternative simultaneously 
when confining their search [11].  
 
The HoMES choice set formation is based on an EBA algorithm, using search preferences revealed by a 1998 
Residential Search Survey [12]. Up to twelve dwellings  are considered each month, reflecting observed search 
tendencies. Dwelling alternatives are firs t filtered by tenure, with the assumption that dwelling tenure remains fixed 
and no tenure conversion or subletting occurs. Alternatives are then narrowed down by structural type (detached, semi-
detached, row house, low/high rise apartment) using a multinomial logit with household income, size, and previous 
dwelling characteristics as predictor variables.  
 
Following choice set restriction by structural type, the searcher will only consider dwellings whose size matches the 
needs of the household, based on the results of the resi dential mobility model (i.e. expanding households looking to 
upsize). The final restriction of alternatives is by asking price, which scopes down the list of potential dwellings 
significantly. Historical patterns provide a range of typic al price-to-income ratios for homebuyers. In all, these 
restrictions result in a choice set small enough to be manageable for the potential homebuyer.  
3.4. Auction Process 
The final step in the HoMES model is market clearing. The previous version, as described in Farooq and Miller [5], 
is determined through a search procedure that clears this dw elling unit. Due to this probabilistic formulation, however, 
the previous approach has some limitations. For instance, th e market fails to clear whenever a bidder only has one 
house in his or her choice set since that probability will al ways be one at any price. To overcome this limitation, the 
new version -to-pay (WTP) for dwellings in 
their choice sets. Under a random utility framework [13], the attractiveness of dwelling j to buyer i can be expressed as 
a utility composed of three terms: a price utility term ( ), a non-price utility term ( ) based on dwelling 
characteristics, and an error term ( ) accounting for differences between obs erved and predicted choice behavior. 
Dwelling utility  is the sum of these terms: 
 
 
 
where  , where , weighted by a parameter ; 
 , where  is a vector of dwelling attributes weighted by a vector of parameters ; and 
   is a Type I Extreme Value distributed error term. 
 
The total utility is therefore: 
 
 
 
Each active household  has a choice set of dwellings ( ), and each active dwelling has a set of bidders ( ). In the 
previous market clearing formulation [5], a micro-
price is varied until certain conditions are met (probab ility sums across buyers and sellers both equal one). This 
algorithm was found to break down when bi dder sets are too small or too large. If a dwelling has very few bidders, the 
transaction price may be forced to drop significantly to achi eve a unit sum of probabilities. Conversely, for a dwelling

845 Adam Rosenﬁ  eld et al.  /  Procedia Computer Science   19  ( 2013 )  841 – 846 
(3)
(4)
(5)
Figure 2. HoMES validation against TREB and CMHC data.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
b) Transaction Prices, 1987
Historical ILUTE
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006
Monthly Housing Completions
c) New Detached Housing Supply
Historical ILUTE
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$400,000
$500,000
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994
a) Asking and Transaction Prices, Detached Homes
Historical Asking
Historical Selling
ILUTE AskingILUTE Asking
ILUTE Selling
with many interested homebuyers, the price may be inflated beyond reasonable values. Furthermore, such an algorithm 
only determines a transaction price, with the winning bidder chosen randomly from amongst the bidder set. 
A new clearing mechanism has been implemented that, rather than imposing a micro -equilibrium, auctions off each 
dwellin . Bidders first determine their non-price utility for each dwelling in their choice set: 
is evaluated based on the attributes of the dwelling unit and the parameters found in Habib [14]. The random 
error term is simulated by drawing from a Type 1 Extreme Value distribution. Then, for each active dwelling with 
bidder set , members of the bidder set determine the high est utility they can achieve for all homes in their choice set 
other than the current dwelling :
where gives the maximum utility bidde r i can obtain fr om th e other 
alternatives in its choice set and therefore sets bidder i
means of 
comparison between choice set alternatives . Household , with a maximum utility of , can bid a certain amount 
on dwelling to achieve that same utilit y. Substituting equations (3) and (4) into (2), t he price the bidder is willing to
pay for this utility is therefore
.
Once all bids have been tendered, the seller evaluates its options and may choose to either sell to the highest bidder,
or reject all offers if none are deemed acceptabl e. 
a Vickrey auction whereby the transaction p rice is equal to the second highest bid (plus a dollar) which most closel y
reflects th e true mark et value of th e h ome [15]. This bid-auction process results in a more realistic simulation of 
market . It 
further improves the dependence of market clearing on ma croeconomic and land use trends as manifested in suppl y-
demand interactions.

846   Adam Rosenﬁ  eld et al.  /  Procedia Computer Science   19  ( 2013 )  841 – 846 
4. Model Performance and Validation 
The HoMES module of ILUTE has been implemented in the C# .NET framework. Parallelization of many of the 
computationally expensive algorithms has resulted in starkly improved performance; run-time for a twenty year 
simulation of the 
result of streamlined and parallelized code. Efforts are under way to comprehensively test and validate HoMES using 
data from the Toronto Real Estate Board (TREB) and th e Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC). 
2a), though ILUTE selling prices tend to be slightly higher than asking, contrary to conventional market dynamics. 
Figure 2b compares cross-sectional distri butions of transaction prices in 1987, and is indicative of slight systematic 
over-prediction. Supply of new detached houses, illustrated in Figure 2c, generally exhibits strong correspondence 
with CMHC data. Results for other types of housing show similar temporal trends; further results on housing supply 
can be found in Farooq and Miller [5]. While preliminary validation results are promising, challenges remain to 
attribute model inaccuracies to the appropriate sub-component. For example, skewed distributions of transaction prices 
may be a product of the bid-auction process, asking price formation, improper residential mobility determination or 
even population demographics. Such interdependencies are reflective of the integrated modeling paradigm and present 
challenges in model calibration. Understanding and resolving these discrepancies is the subject of current analysis. 
5. Conclusion 
This paper has presented an agent-ba sed implementation of urban housing market dynamics as part of the ILUTE 
model system. HoMES introduces some key features that offer marked improvement over previous models. These 
include: better integration among housing market sub-models, such as predictors  of residential mobility becoming 
determinants of choice set formation; explicit modeling of the residential tenure decision; an improved asking price 
model more sensitive to endogenous micro and macro-economic factors; a willingness-to-pay framework of market 
clearing using a bid-auction process; and finally, a streamlined technical implementation with performance capabilities 
to rapidly execute full-population simulations. Future wo rk remains to be done to further incorporate the spatial 
attributes of location choice into the land use model. Fu rthermore, completed implementation of a rental housing 
market simulation would complete the HoMES framework. Co mmercial and industrial land use models are also a key 
necessity in modeling firmographic and labor force dynamics, and remain as priorities for the ILUTE modeling team. 
References 
[1] Chingcuanco, F. and Miller, E.J. Demographic Microsimulation Model for Integrated Land Use, Transportation, and Environment Model 
System. In 92nd Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board (Washington, D.C. 2013). 
[2] Habib, M.A. and Miller, E.J. Influence of Transportation Access and Market Dynamics on Property Values: Multilevel Spatio-Temporal 
Models of Housing Price. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board (2008), 2076: 188-191. 
[3] Habib, M.A. and Miller, E.J. Reference-Dependent Residential Location Choice Model within a Relocation Context. Transportation Research 
Record, Journal of the Transportation Research Board (2009), 2133: 56-63. 
[4] Haider, M. and Miller, E.J. Modelling location choices of housing builders in the Greater Toronto Area. Transportation Research Record, 1898 
(2004), 148-156. 
[5] Farooq, B. and Miller, E.J. Towards integrated land use and transportation: A dynamic disequilibrium based microsimulation. Transportation 
Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 46, 7 (2012), 1030-1053. 
[6] Miller, E.J., Chingcuanco, F., Farooq, B., Habib, K.M.N., Habib, M.A., and McElroy, D. Development of an operational integrated urban 
model system, volume IV: Demographic and labour market updating. University of Toronto (2008). 
[7] Rossi, P. Why families move: A study in the social psychology of urban residential mobility. Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois, 1955. 
[8] Henderson, J. V. and Ioannides, Y. M. A model of housing tenure choice. The American Economic Review, 73, 1 (1983), 98-113. 
[9] Young, W. A non-tradeoff decision making model of residential location choice. Transportation Research, 18A (1984), 1-11. 
[10] Lerman, S. R. A disaggregate behavioural model of urban mobility decisions. PhD Thesis, Cambridge, 1975. 
[11] Michelson, W. Environmental choice, human behaviour, and residential satisfaction. Oxford University Press, New York, 1977. 
[12] Pushkar, A. O. Modelling household residential search processes. MASc Thesis, Toronto, 1998. 
[13] McFadden, D. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behaviour. Frontiers in Econometrics (1974), 105-142. 
[14] Habib, M.A. Microsimulating residential mobility and location choice processes within an integrated land use and transportation modelling 
system. PhD Thesis, Toronto, 2009. 
[15] Vickrey, W. Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive Sealed Tenders. The Journal of Finance, 16, 1 (1961), 8-37.
