Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence 6071
Edited by R. Goebel, J. Siekmann, and W. Wahlster
Subseries of Lecture Notes in Computer Science

Piotr Je ˛drzejowicz Ngoc Thanh Nguyen
Robert J. Howlett Lakhmi C. Jain (Eds.)
Agent and Multi-Agent
Systems: Technologies
and Applications
4th KES International Symposium, KES-AMSTA 2010
Gdynia, Poland, June 23-25, 2010, Proceedings
Part II
13

Series Editors
Randy Goebel, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Jörg Siekmann, University of Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany
Wolfgang Wahlster, DFKI and University of Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany
V olume Editors
Piotr Je ˛drzejowicz
Gdynia Maritime University
81-221 Gdynia, Poland
E-mail: pj@am.gdynia.pl
Ngoc Thanh Nguyen
Wroclaw University of Technology,
50-370 Wroclaw, Poland
E-mail: Ngoc-Thanh.Nguyen@pwr.wroc.pl
Robert J. Howlett
University of Brighton
Brighton BN2 4GJ, United Kingdom
E-mail: rjhowlett@kesinternational.org
Lakhmi C. Jain
University of South Australia
Mawson Lakes, SA, 5095, Australia
E-mail: Lakhmi.Jain@unisa.edu.au
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010927934
CR Subject Classiﬁcation (1998): I.2, H.2.8, H.3-5, J.4, C.2, D.2
LNCS Sublibrary: SL 7 – Artiﬁcial Intelligence
ISSN 0302-9743
ISBN-10 3-642-13540-4 Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York
ISBN-13 978-3-642-13540-8 Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication
or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965,
in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Violations are liable
to prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
springer.com
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
Printed in Germany
Typesetting: Camera-ready by author, data conversion by Scientiﬁc Publishing Services, Chennai, India
Printed on acid-free paper 06/3180

4th International KES Symposium on Agents and 
Multi-Agent Systems – Technologies and Applications, 
Proceedings, Part II 
LNAI 6071 
Preface 
This volume contains the proceedings (Par t II) of the 4th KES Symposium on Agent 
and Multi-Agent Systems – Technologies and Applications (KES-AMSTA 2010) held 
at Gdynia Maritime University in Pola nd during June 23–25, 2010. The symposium 
was organized by Gdynia Maritime University, KES International and its Focus Group 
on Agent and Multi-Agent Systems. The KES-AMSTA Symposium series is a sub-
series of the KES Conference series. 
Following the successes of the First KES Symposium on Agent and Multi-Agent 
Systems – Technologies and Applications (KES-AMSTA 2007) held in Wrocław, 
Poland, the Second KES Symposium on Agent and Multi-Agent Systems  
(KES-AMSTA 2008) held in Incheon, Korea, and the Third KES Symposium on 
Agent and Multi-Agent Systems (KES-AMSTA  2009) held in Uppsala, Sweden,  
KES-AMSTA 2010 featured keynote talks, oral presentations, and a number of invited 
sessions, closely aligned to the theme of the conference. 
 The aim of the symposium was to provide an internationally respected forum for 
scientific research in the technologies and applications of agent and multi-agent sys-
tems. The discussed field is concerned with the development and analysis of sophisti-
cated, AI-based problem-solving and contro l architectures for both single-agent and 
multiple-agent systems. Current topics of research in multi-agent systems include, 
among others, agent-oriented software engineering, beliefs, desires, and intentions, 
agent cooperation, coordination, negotiation, organization and communication,  
distributed problem solving, specification of agent communication languages and 
formalization of ontologies.  
The symposium attracted a substantial number of researchers and practitioners from 
all over the world who submitted their papers for nine main tracks covering the meth-
odology and applications of agent and multi-agent systems and five special sessions 
on specific topics within the field. Subm issions came from over 35 countries. Each 
paper was peer reviewed by at least two members of the International Program Com-
mittee and International Reviewer Board. Only 83 papers were selected for oral pres-
entation and publication in the two volumes of the KES-AMSTA 2010 proceedings.  
The Program Committee defined the following main tracks: Multi-Agent Systems 
Design and Implementation, Negotiations and Social Issues, Web Services and  
Semantic Web, Cooperation, Coordination and Teamwork, Agent-Based Modeling,

Preface 
 
VI 
Simulation and Decision Making, Multi-Agent Applications, Management and  
e-Business, Mobile Agents and Robots, and Machine Learning. In addition to the 
main tracks of the symposium there were the following five special sessions: Agent-
Based Optimization (ABO2010), Agent-Enabled Social Computing (AESC2010), 
Digital Economy (DE2010), Using Intelligent Systems for Information Technology 
Assessment (ISITA2010) and a Doctoral Track. 
Accepted and presented papers highlight new trends and challenges in agent and 
multi-agent research. We hope these results will be of value to the research commu-
nity working in the fields of artificial intelligence, collective computational intelli-
gence, robotics, machine learning and, in particular, agent and multi-agent systems 
technologies and applications.  
We would like to express our sincere thanks to the Honorary Chairs, Romuald 
Cwilewicz, President of the Gdynia Maritime University, Poland, and Lakhmi C. Jain, 
University of South Australia, Australia, for their support. 
Our special thanks go to the Local Organizing Committee chaired by Ireneusz 
Czarnowski, who did very solid and excellent work. Thanks are due to the Program 
Co-chairs, all Program and Reviewer Committee members and all the additional  
reviewers for their valuable efforts in the review process, which helped us to guarantee 
the highest quality of selected papers for the conference. We cordially thank the  
organizers and chairs of special sessions, which essentially contributed to the success 
of the conference. 
We would like to thank our main sponsor, Gdynia Maritime University. Our special 
thanks also go to Springer for publishing the proceedings, and we thank our other 
sponsors for their kind support.  
We would also like to express our thanks to the keynote speakers––Joanna  
Józefowska, Sankar Kumar Pal, Andrzej Skowron, Alex Rogers, and Paolo Torroni, 
for their interesting and informative talks of world-class standard. We cordially thank 
all the authors for their valuable contributions and all the other participants of this 
conference. The conference would not have been possible without their support. 
 
 Piotr J ędrzejowicz 
Ngoc Thanh Nguyen 
Robert J. Howlett 
Lakhmi C. Jain

KES-AMSTA 2010 Conference Organization 
Honorary Chairs 
Romuald Cwilewicz  
President of the Gdynia Maritime University, Poland  
Lakhmi C. Jain  
University of South Australia, Australia  
General Chairs 
Piotr Jędrzejowicz  
Gdynia Maritime University, Poland  
Ngoc Thanh Nguyen  
Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Executive Chair  
Robert J. Howlett  
University of Brighton, UK  
Program Co-chairs 
Dariusz Barbucha  
Gdynia Maritime University, Poland  
Radosław Katarzyniak  
Wrocław University of Technology, Poland  
Alexander Sharpanskykh  
VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Local Organizing Chair 
Ireneusz Czarnowski  
Gdynia Maritime University, Poland 
Publicity Co-chairs  
Ewa Ratajczak-Ropel  
Gdynia Maritime University, Poland  
Izabela Wierzbowska 
Gdynia Maritime University, Poland

Organization VIII 
Special Session Chairs 
1.  Agent-Based Optimization (ABO2010) 
Piotr Jędrzejowicz, Gdynia Maritime University, Poland  
Ireneusz Czarnowski, Gdynia Maritime University, Poland 
 
2.  Agent-Enabled Social Computing (AESC2010) 
Daniel Moldt, University of Hamburg, Germany 
Alexei Sharpanskykh, VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
 
3.  Digital Economy (DE2010) 
Arkadiusz Kawa, Poznań University of Economics, Poland 
Yun-Heh (Jessica) Chen-Burger, University of Edinburgh, UK 
Konrad Fuks, Poznań University of Economics, Poland 
 
4.  Using Intelligent Systems for Information Technology Assessment (ISITA2010) 
Cezary Orłowski, Gdańsk University of Technology, Poland 
Adam Czarnecki, Gdańsk University of Technology, Poland 
 
5.  Doctoral Track 
Dariusz Król, Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Keynote Speakers 
Joanna Józefowska 
Poznań University of Technology, Poland 
Knowledge Representation for Automated Reasoning 
Sankar Kumar Pal 
Indian Statistical Institute, India 
Machine Intelligence, Rough-Fuzzy Computing and Data Mining with Applications 
Andrzej Skowron 
Institute of Mathematics, Warsaw University, Poland 
Discovery of Processes and Their Interactions from Data and Domain Knowledge 
Alex Rogers 
University of Southampton, UK 
Intelligent Agents for the Smart Grid 
Paolo Torroni 
University of Bologna, Italy 
Declarative Technologies for Open Agent Systems and Beyond

Organization  IX 
International Program Committee 
Francesco Amigoni Politecnico di Milano, Italy 
Dariusz Barbucha Gdynia Maritime University, Poland 
Maria Bielikova Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava,  
Slovakia 
Grażyna Brzykcy Pozna ń University of Technology, Poland 
František Čapkovič  Slovak Academy of Sciences, Slovakia 
Krzysztof Cetnarowicz University of Science and Technology, Poland 
Shyi-Ming Chen National Taiwan University of Science and 
Technology, Taiwan 
Jessica Chen-Burger The University of Edinburgh, UK 
Matteo Cristani  University of Verona, Italy 
Ireneusz Czarnowski Gdynia Maritime University, Poland 
Paul Davidsson Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden 
Marek Dudek AGH University of Science and Technology, 
Poland 
Barbara Dunin-Kęplicz University of Warsaw, Poland 
Antonio Fernandez-Caballero University of Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain 
Lila Georgiewa Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK  
Paulina Golińska Pozna ń University of Technology, Poland 
Anne Hakansson Uppsala University, Sweden 
Chihab Hanachi IRIT Laboratory, University of Toulouse, France 
Sorin Hintea Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
Adam Jatowt Kyoto University, Japan 
Gordan Jezic University of Zagreb, Croatia 
Joanna Jędrzejowicz University of Gda ńsk, Poland 
Piotr Jędrzejowicz Gdynia Maritime University, Poland 
Clement Jonquet Stanford University, USA 
Joanna Józefowska Pozna ń University of Technology, Poland 
Jason J. Jung Yeungnam University, Korea 
Krzysztof Juszczyszyn Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Hideki Katagiri Hiroshima University Kagamiyama, Japan 
Radosław Katarzyniak Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Arkadiusz Kawa Pozna ń University of Economics, Poland 
Przemysław Kazienko Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Chonggun Kim Yeungnam University, Korea 
Yanghee Kim Utah State University, USA 
Michel Klein VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
In-Young Ko Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Korea 
Grzegorz Kołaczek Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Dariusz Król Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Daniel Kudenko University of York Heslington, UK

Organization X 
Kazuhiro Kuwabara Ritsumeikan University, Japan 
Zne-Jung Lee Huafan University, Taiwan 
Rory Lewis University of Colorado, at Colorado Springs, USA 
Fuhua Lin Athabasca University, Canada 
Patrick Maier University of Edinburgh, UK  
Urszula Markowska-Kaczmar Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Daniel Molet University of Hamburg, Germany 
Ngoc Thanh Nguyen Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Luís Nunes Lisbon University Institute, Portugal 
Jeng-Shyang Pan National Kaohsiung University of Applied Science, 
Taiwan 
Paweł Pawlewski Pozna ń University of Technology, Poland 
Viara Popowa De Montfort University, UK 
Zbigniew Raś University of North Carolina-Charlotte, USA 
Ewa Ratajczak-Ropel Gdynia Maritime University, Poland 
Alessandro Ricci University of Bologna, Italy 
Bastin Tony Roy Savarimuthu University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand 
Franciszek Seredynski Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland 
Mae L. Seto Dalhousie University, Canada 
Alexei Sharpanskykh VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Roman Słowiński Pozna ń University of Technology, Poland 
Janusz Sobecki Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Ryszard Tadeusiewicz AGH University of Science and Technology, 
Poland 
Yasufumi Takama Tokyo Metropolitan University, Japan 
Zbigniew Telec Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Wojciech Thomas Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Bogdan Trawiński Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
Daniel Zeng Chinese Academy of Sciences and University of 
Arizona, USA 
Wen-Ran Zhang Georgia Southern University, USA 
KES-AMSTA Symposium Series and Focus Group on Agent and 
Multi-Agent System Chair 
Ngoc Thanh Nguyen  
Wrocław University of Technology, Poland 
KES International Conference Series Chairs 
Robert J. Howlett  
University of Brighton, UK 
Lakhmi C. Jain  
University of South Australia, Australia

Table of Contents – Part I I
Management and e-Business
Agent-Based Decision Making in the Electronic Marketplace: Interactive
Negotiation ..................................................... 1
Sung Ho Ha
Modeling and Verifying Business Interactions via Commitments and
Dialogue Actions................................................. 11
Mohamed El-Menshawy, Jamal Bentahar, and Rachida Dssouli
Personalized Support for Management of Financial Instruments by
Means of Software Agents......................................... 22
Jarogniew Rykowski
MAS Approach to Business Models Simulations: Supply Chain
Management Case Study.......................................... 32
Jacek Jakie/suppressla, Pawe/suppressl Litwin, and Marcin Olech
Analysing Bidder Performance in Randomised and Fixed-Deadline
Automated Auctions ............................................. 42
Kumaara Velan and Erol Gelenbe
Mobile Agents and Robots
cljRobust - Clojure Programming API for Lego Mindstorms NXT ...... 52
Konrad Ku/suppresslakowski
Agent-Enabled Collaborative Downloading: Towards Energy-Eﬃcient
Provisioning of Group-Oriented Services ............................ 62
Iva Bojic, Vedran Podobnik, and Mario Kusek
Lifespan-Aware Routing for Wireless Sensor Networks ................ 72
Adam Czubak and Jakub Wojtanowski
Machine Learning
A Machine Learning Approach to Speech Act Classiﬁcation Using
Function Words.................................................. 82
James O’Shea, Zuhair Bandar, and Keeley Crockett
Neural Networks for Solving the Superposition Problem Using
Approximation Method and Adaptive Learning Rate ................. 92
Th´eophile K. Dagba, Villevo Adanhounm` e, and
S`emiyou A. Ad´edjouma

XII Table of Contents – Part II
Distributed Data Mining System Based on Multi-agent Communication
Mechanism ...................................................... 100
Sung Gook Kim, Kyeong Deok Woo, Jerzy Bala, and Sung Wook Baik
Biologically Inspired Agent System Based on Spiking Neural Network... 110
Bart/suppresslomiej J´ozef Dzie´nkowski and Urszula Markowska-Kaczmar
Agent-Based Optimization (ABO2010)
Cooperative Optimization in Cellular Automata - Based Multiagent
Systems with Spatio-temporally Generalized Prisoner’s Dilemma
Model .......................................................... 120
Michal Seredynski, Romuald Kotowski, and Wojciech M¸aka
An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Data Reduction ... 130
Ireneusz Czarnowski and Piotr J↪edrzejowicz
Feature Set Reduction by Evolutionary Selection and Construction..... 140
Katarzyna Drozdz and Halina Kwasnicka
Iterative Method for Improving Consistency of Multi-attribute Object
Judgments Performed by Teams of Decision Makers .................. 150
Henryk Piech and Urszula Bednarska
Experimental Investigation of the Synergetic Eﬀect Produced by
Agents Solving Together Instances of the Euclidean Planar Travelling
Salesman Problem ............................................... 160
Piotr J↪edrzejowicz and Izabela Wierzbowska
Multidimentional Self-organization for Online Time-Constrained
Vehicle Routing Problems ......................................... 170
Besma Zeddini and Mahdi Zargayouna
Cooperative Solution to the Vehicle Routing Problem................. 180
Dariusz Barbucha
AdQL – Anomaly Detection Q-Learning in Control Multi-queue
Systems with QoS Constraints ..................................... 190
Michal Stanek and Halina Kwasnicka
Two Ensemble Classiﬁers Constructed from GEP-Induced Expression
Trees ........................................................... 200
Joanna J¸edrzejowicz and Piotr J↪edrzejowicz
Experimental Evaluation of the A-Team Solving Instances of the
RCPSP/max Problem ............................................ 210
Ewa Ratajczak-Ropel

T able of Contents – Part II XIII
Agent-Enabled Social Computing (AESC2010)
Early Warning of Cardiac Problems in a Crowd...................... 220
Przemys/suppresslaw Gawro´nski, Khalid Saeed, and Krzysztof Ku/suppresslakowski
Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios........................ 229
Wieslawa Sikora and Janusz Malinowski
Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model for Driver Behavior...... 242
Christian Maag, Christian Mark, and Hans-Peter Kr¨uger
Modelling Dynamic Forgetting in Distributed Information Systems ..... 252
Nicolas H¨oning and Martijn C. Schut
Integrated Modeling of Cognitive Agents in Socio-technical Systems .... 262
Alexei Sharpanskykh
Digital Economy (DE2010)
Aggregated Information Representation for Technical Analysis on Stock
Market with Csisz´ar Divergence.................................... 272
Ryszard Szupiluk, Piotr Wojewnik, and Tomasz Z↪abkowski
Implementation of Network Oriented Manufacturing Structures ........ 282
Marek Dudek and Pawe/suppresslP a w l e w s k i
Supply Chain Arrangements in Recovery Network.................... 292
Arkadiusz Kawa and Paulina Golinska
A Study of Stock Market Trading Behavior and Social Interactions
through a Multi Agent Based Simulation............................ 302
Zahra Kodia, Lamjed Ben Said, and Khaled Ghedira
e-Sourcing Cluster Strategies: Empathy vs. Egoism ................... 312
Konrad Fuks and Arkadiusz Kawa
Application of Economic Order Value for Creation of Time-Deﬁned
Transactions in Web-Based Open Sourcing System ................... 321
Paulina Golinska, Grzegorz Klimarczyk, Zygmunt Kopacz, and
Micha/suppressl Masadynski
Using Intelligent Systems for Information Technology
Assessment (ISITA2010)
Ontology as a Tool for the IT Management Standards Support ........ 330
Adam Czarnecki and Cezary Or/suppresslowski
Methods of Incomplete and Uncertain Knowledge Acquisition in the
Knowledge Processing Environment ................................ 340
Cezary Or/suppresslowski, Tomasz Sitek, and Rafa/suppressl Rybacki

XIV Table of Contents – Part II
An Approach to Agent-Based Supporting System for IT Projects ...... 351
Cezary Or/suppresslowski and Artur Zi´o/suppresslkowski
Doctoral Track
ACO-GA Approach to Paper-Reviewer Assignment Problem in CMS ... 360
Tomasz Kolasa and Dariusz Kr´ol
Updatable Multi-agent OSGi Architecture for Smart Home System ..... 370
Piotr Jaszczyk and Dariusz Kr´ol
An Approach to Evaluate the Impact of Web Traﬃc in Web
Positioning ...................................................... 380
Pawe/suppressl Kowalski and Dariusz Kr´ol
Agent System for Managing Distributed Mobile Interactive
Documents ...................................................... 390
Magdalena Godlewska
Multiagent Means of Bandwidth Allocation for Telecommunication
Market ......................................................... 400
Adam Po/suppresslomski
Author Index .................................................. 409

Table of Contents – Part I
Keynote Speeches
Declarative Technologies for Open Agent Systems and Beyond......... 1
Federico Chesani, Paola Mello, Marco Montali, and Paolo Torroni
Knowledge Representation for Automated Reasoning ................. 6
Joanna J´ozefowska
Discovery of Processes and Their Interactions from Data and Domain
Knowledge ...................................................... 12
Andrzej Skowron
Multi-Agent Systems Design and Implementation
Engaging the Dynamics of Trust in Computational Trust and
Reputation Systems .............................................. 22
Agnieszka Danek, Joana Urbano, Ana Paula Rocha, and
Eug´enio Oliveira
An Evaluation Method for Multi-Agent Systems ..................... 32
Pierpaolo Di Bitonto, Maria Laterza, Teresa Roselli, and
Veronica Rossano
Trust Estimation Using Contextual Fitness.......................... 42
Joana Urbano, Ana Paula Rocha, and Eug´enio Oliveira
A Method for Improving Agent’s Autonomy ......................... 52
Izabela Rejer
Service Oriented Context-Aware Software Agents for Greater
Eﬃciency ....................................................... 62
Kutila Gunasekera, Arkady Zaslavsky, Shonali Krishnaswamy, and
Seng Wai Loke
Methods of Task Redistribution in Multiagent Systems ............... 72
Piotr Kalinowski and Rados/suppresslaw Katarzyniak
REST-A and Intercycle Messages .................................. 82
Michael Bergeret and Abdelkader Goua¨ıch
Negotiations and Social Issues
Improving Multi-agent Negotiations Using Multi-Objective PSO
Algorithm....................................................... 92
Ahmad Esmaeili and Nasser Mozayani

XVI Table of Contents – Part I
Including Notions of Fairness in Development of an Integrated
Multi-agent Online Dispute Resolution Environment.................. 102
Brooke Abrahams and John Zeleznikow
Role Monitoring in Open Agent Societies ........................... 112
Federico Chesani, Paola Mello, Marco Montali, and Paolo Torroni
Trust and Distrust Prediction in Social Network with Combined
Graphical and Review-Based Attributes............................. 122
Piotr Borzymek and Marcin Sydow
Web Services and Semantic Web
A Method for Reasoning about Complex Services within Geographic
Information Systems ............................................. 132
Piotr Grobelny
Providing Web Service of Established Quality with the Use of HTTP
Requests Scheduling Methods ..................................... 142
Krzysztof Zatwarnicki
Three-Valued Paraconsistent Reasoning for Semantic Web Agents...... 152
Linh Anh Nguyen and Andrzej Sza/suppresslas
A Framework of an Agent-Based Personal Assistant for Internet
Users ........................................................... 163
Bernadetta Mianowska and Ngoc Thanh Nguyen
Building Multiagent Environment for Military Decision Support Tools
with Semantic Services ........................................... 173
Mariusz Chmielewski, Marcin Wilkos, and Krzysztof Wilkos
Information Flow Based Speciﬁcation of Data Integration Problem ..... 183
Gra˙zyna Brzykcy
Cooperation, Coordination and Teamwork
Cooperation of Agents in Manufacturing Systems .................... 193
Frantiˇsek ˇCapkoviˇc
Mitigating Human-Human Collaboration Problems Using Software
Agents ......................................................... 203
Moamin Ahmed, Mohd Sharifuddin Ahmad, and
Mohd. Zaliman M. Yusoﬀ
Team Formation and Optimization for Service Provisioning............ 213
Kresimir Jurasovic, Mario Kusek, and Gordan Jezic
Self-adaptation Strategies to Favor Cooperation...................... 223
Markus Eberling and Hans Kleine B¨uning

Table of Contents – Part I XVI I
The Eﬀects of Local Trust Cooperation in Multiagent Systems......... 233
Thomas Schmidt, Markus Eberling, and Hans Kleine B¨uning
Using BDI-Agents with Coordination without Communication to
Increase Lifetime, Preserving Autonomy and Flexibility in Wireless
Sensor Networks ................................................. 243
Underl´ea Corrˆea, Francisco Vasques, Jomi H ¨ubner, and
Carlos Montez
Towards an Integrated Approach of Real-Time Coordination for
Multi-agent Systems.............................................. 253
Ghulam Mahdi, Abdelkader Goua¨ıch, and Fabien Michel
Agent-Based Modeling, Simulation and Decision
Making
The Inﬂuence of Call Graph Topology on the Dynamics of
Telecommunication Markets....................................... 263
Bogumil Kaminski and Maciej Latek
Classifying Agent Behaviour through Relational Sequential Patterns.... 273
Grazia Bombini, Nicola Di Mauro, Stefano Ferilli, and
Floriana Esposito
Multi-agent Based Simulation of Animal Food Selective Behavior in a
Pastoral System ................................................. 283
Islem Henane, Lamjed Ben Said, Sameh Hadouaj, and Nasr Ragged
Movement Simulation and Management of Cooperating Objects in
CGF Systems: A Case Study ...................................... 293
Zbigniew Tarapata
Simulating Collective Intelligence of the Communities of Practice Using
Agent-Based Methods ............................................ 305
Emil Scarlat and Iulia Maries
Using Perseus System for Modelling Epistemic Interactions ............ 315
Magdalena Kacprzak, Piotr Kulicki, Robert Trypuz,
Katarzyna Budzynska, Pawel Garbacz, Marek Lechniak, and
Pawel Rembelski
A g e n t - B a s e dA p p r o a c hi nE v a c u a t i o nM o d e l i n g...................... 325
Jaros/suppresslaw W ↪as and Konrad Ku/suppresslakowski
Multi-Agent Applications
Core Non-emptiness Checking in Hedonic Games via Diﬀerence Logic... 331
Helena Kein¨anen

XVIII T able of Contents – Part I
Distributed Classiﬁcation: Architecture and Cooperation Protocol in a
Multi-agent System for E-Health ................................... 341
Nicolas Singer, Sylvie Trouilhet, Ali Rammal, and
Jean-Marie Pecatte
Multidimensional Data Visualization Applied for User’s Questionnaire
Data Quality Assessment ......................................... 351
Jaros/suppresslaw Drapa/suppressla, Dmitrij ˙Zatuchin, and Janusz Sobecki
Early Contention Notiﬁcation for TCP Performance in Mobile Ad Hoc
Networks ....................................................... 361
Woosuck Chang, Chen Ni, Geumdeok Kim, and Chonggun Kim
Agent-Based Remote Conversation Support for People with Aphasia.... 371
Kazuhiro Kuwabara, Yuya Shimode, and Shohei Miyamoto
On the Eﬀective Distribution of Knowledge Represented by
Complementary Graphs........................................... 381
Leszek Kotulski and Adam S¸edziwy
Building Group Recommendations in E-learning Systems.............. 391
Danuta Zakrzewska
Leader Election Based on Centrality and Connectivity Measurements
in Ad Hoc Networks .............................................. 401
M a r yW u ,C h o n g g u nK i m ,a n dJ a s o nJ .J u n g
Concept of Analysing Spreading of an “Epidemics” by Means of a
Multi-Agent Simulation........................................... 411
Bartosz Lipi´nski and Tomasz Tarnawski
A Multi-Agent System to Assist with Property Valuation Using
Heterogeneous Ensembles of Fuzzy Models .......................... 420
Magdalena Graczyk, Tadeusz Lasota, Zbigniew Telec, and
Bogdan Trawi´nski
Performance Evaluation of Multiagent Systems for Power System
Topology Veriﬁcation............................................. 430
Kazimierz Wilkosz, Zoﬁa Kruczkiewicz, Tomasz Babczy´nski, and
Wojciech Penar
Author Index .................................................. 441

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 1–10, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Agent-Based Decision Making in the Electronic 
Marketplace: Interactive Negotiation 
Sung Ho Ha 
School of Business Administration, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea 
hsh@mail.knu.ac.kr 
Abstract. Negotiation is a process of reaching an agreement on the transaction 
terms (e.g., price, quantity) for two or more parties. Negotiation tries to maxi-
mize the benefits for all parties concerned. Instead of human-based negotiation, 
the e-commerce environment provides such an environment as adopting auto-
mated negotiation. Under these circumstances, choosing agent technology is 
appropriate for an automatic electronic negotiation platform, since autonomous 
software agents try to perform the best deal on behalf of the human participants. 
Negotiation agents need a clear-cut definition of negotiation models or strate-
gies. In reality, most bargaining systems embody almost one negotiation model. 
In this article, a multi-agent negotiation system with selectable negotiation 
strategies is introduced. It allows agents to select a user’s favorite negotiation 
strategy, which can be preinstalled as a component in the system. A prototype 
system is implemented in compliance with FIPA specifications.  
Keywords: Multi agent, mobile agent, negotiation agent, negotiation strategy. 
1   Introduction 
Negotiation is a process of reaching an agreement on the terms of a transaction, in-
cluding price and quantity, for two or more parties [1]. It tries to reach a deal to 
maximize the benefits for all parties concerned. Human-based negotiation, however, 
could be an expensive and non-optimal method, even though beneficial to the partici-
pants. Traditional human-based negotiation has several shortcomings. More time may 
be needed to reach a consensus, if some of the human parties involved do not concede 
in order to maximize their own benefits or goals. It could be difficult for novice nego-
tiators to mimic experts who have skillful negotiation tactics. Therefore, automated 
negotiation is particularly useful in an e-commerce environment. 
A negotiation process is competitive and is entirely dependent of negotiation coun-
terparts. Thus, choosing agent technology is appropriate for an automatic electronic 
negotiation platform, since autonomous software agents strive for the best deal on 
behalf of the human participants [2][3]. In order to achieve the best results, a negotia-
tion agent needs a clear-cut definition of what capabilities it can provide––negotiation 
models or strategies. There are currently several types of negotiation models for 
automated bargaining and many researchers have designed systems using the models. 
Nevertheless, most bargaining systems embody only one negotiation model [4].

2 S.H. Ha 
In this article, the MANS/SNS (multi-agent negotiation system with selectable ne-
gotiation strategies) is presented, which allows agents to dynamically embody a user’s 
favorite negotiation strategy which can be preinstalled as a component within the 
system. The system allows multiple agents to travel from one server to another on the 
network to negotiate autonomously and automatically with counterpart agents regard-
ing offers. The system has a mechanism, called SNS, to enable the negotiating agents 
to combine pluggable strategy components that integrate negotiation capabilities to 
implement negotiation strategies.  
2   Negotiation in the Electronic Commerce 
Electronic commerce systems allow buyers to purchase goods through the Internet. 
However, it becomes much difficult to trace all available sellers through the Internet. 
Hence, the buyer may be interested in delegating their purchase tasks (including nego-
tiations) to a software agent. With the increasing importance of electronic commerce 
across the Internet, the need for agents to support both buyers and sellers in purchas-
ing and selling goods is growing rapidly. 
According to several reference models [5 ], the electronic commerce is comprised 
of three phases: information, negotiation, and settlement. In the first phase, prospec-
tive buyers identify and evaluate their needs as well as alternative sources to fulfill 
them, while sellers arrange to provide their goods and identify potential buyers.  
Subsequently, prospective buyers and sellers negotiate the terms of a deal, which is 
finalized by a contract. Eventually, the cont ract is executed and the objects of the 
transaction are exchanged according to the conditions previously stipulated. There 
have been several approaches dealing with the first and third phase, and a few systems 
exist for automatic negotiation concerning the second phase. This includes Market-
Maker from MIT Media Labs [6]. Until now, a few commercial systems exist, which 
equip mobile agents with automatic negotiation mechanisms. 
There are some requirements for negotiation within electronic commerce. One is to 
formulate the negotiation. Ontology must cover all important attributes of a product, 
such as price, quantity, or quality. Each of essential variables must be specific to the 
agent for a valid comparison. The second requirement is a negotiation process. The 
negotiation process of software agents typically goes through four major steps: Dele-
gation of a negotiating authority to agents; the initialization of a negotiation task and 
the proposal of an offer by one of the parties; the evaluation of proposals by others; 
and suggestions of a new counter-proposal if other parties do not accept the offer. 
This process may be repeated several times until both parties reach an agreement.  
The last requirement is to determine appropriate system architecture. Such a sys-
tem must have the capability to use the Internet as a backbone for transmitting data to 
different negotiating parties. In addition, the architecture must have the ability to 
support both synchronous and asynchronous negotiations. The widespread acceptance 
of Java provides the essential groundwork upon which an agent-based framework can 
be built. There have been several agent models, which have embedded multi-agent 
system architecture into their designs: Aglet, Agent Tcl [7], ARA [8], Concordia [9], 
Mole [10], Odyssey, TACOMA [11], Voyager, SHIPMAI [12], and Nomad [13]. 
Each framework promotes a different concept in the agent programming. The use of

Agent-Based Decision Making in the Electronic Marketplace: Interactive Negotiation 3 
abstractions varies, as well as the actual capabilities provided by each class library, as 
do the benefits they bring [13][14][15]. 
3   Architecture of Multi-agent Negotiation System 
A multi-agent-based negotiation system with the adaptive negotiation strategies has 
been developed. Fig. 1 illustrates the detailed architecture of the MANS/SNS at the 
component level, including agents, objects, and databases.  
 
 
Fig. 1. Component-level architecture of the MANS/SNS for the electronic negotiations 
This e-marketplace system consists of an interface agent (IA), a catalog manager 
(CM), a brokering manager (BM), and an electronic marketplace shared repository 
(EMSR). The IA assists users in interacting with the e-marketplace system, tracking 
users’ behavior, and providing users with interesting items in a user-adaptive form. 
The CM and BM are ordinary business logic components that are parts of the  
e-marketplace. Market participants (buyer s and sellers) post and notify products or 
services, which they want to trade through the CM. The BM makes decisions  
that help determine what to buy and from whom to buy. The EMSR stores an  
e-marketplace’s activity history, which results from the CM and BM.  
The negotiation manager (NM) is one of the major concerns outlined in this article. 
The MANS/SNS has nine major components that have close relationships with the 
NM, and each component is tightly integrated to meet the goals of achieving multiple-
issue negotiations:

4 S.H. Ha 
• There are a negotiation manager agent (N MA), a negotiation shared repository 
(NSR), a mobile-agent creation agent (MCA), and an agent-dock management 
agent (AMA) in a negotiation control server (NCS) which takes charge of the 
whole process of negotiation; 
• There are a negotiation strategy agent (NSA), a negotiation strategy ontology 
(NSO), and a negotiation strategy library (NSL) in a negotiation strategy shared 
server (NSSS) which enables negotiation agents to reuse adaptive negotiation 
strategies; 
• There are a negotiation control agent (N CA) and a negotiation transaction reposi-
tory (NTR) in negotiation agent execution servers (NAES) which provide a run-
time environment for negotiation agent execution. 
 
While a user sends a request to create a negotiation agent to the NMA, he or she details 
highly-tailored negotiation parameters and issues. The NMA stores the user’s request 
on the NSR and it is forwarded to the MCA. The MCA locates a suitable NAES, cre-
ates agents, and launches them onto the selected NAES where the computational load 
is low or the connection to the NCS is less congested in the network. An agent is clas-
sified as either a negotiation provider agent (NPA) or a negotiation decider agent 
(NDA). A buyer or a seller can be an owner of either the NPA or the NDA. 
An agent management system (AMS) agent––a required component of the Java 
agent development (JADE) environment––helps the MCA to do load balancing and it 
enables mobile agents to locate a NAES in which they reside. A traveling agent con-
sists of a code, data, and state. The transmission of these things is handled through 
Java’s object serialization methods and the agent system’s class-loading mechanism. 
The NMA registers new agents at the NSR, monitors the progress of agents, and 
maintains the state of agents and system statistics. A user can see and manage mobile 
agents after they are registered at the repository. When an authenticated user asks 
about agent status, the NMA displays all of the user’s registered agents. In an agent 
execution environment on a NAES, the agents communicate directly with each other 
and actively negotiate on the owner’s behalf, even when the user is disconnected from 
the network. This eventually reduces network traffic and the agents continue to  
operate while network connections are down. In addition, since agents are executed 
on the separate servers, an e-marketplace site can relieve the burden of executing the 
computationally-intensive negotiation strategies. 
Once a negotiation agent travels to a NAES, the NCA manages the life cycle of an 
agent and it provides the mechanism to destroy agents. If a user requests to terminate 
an agent, the NMA receives the message from the user and sends it to the NCA. The 
NCA terminates the agent in question and the NMA makes the killed agent unregis-
tered from the NSR. Before executing negotiations, the NCA refers to the negotiation 
specifications of the agents and asks the NSA to choose appropriate negotiation 
strategies. The NSA refers to the NSO, and then, generates a negotiation strategy 
object from the template strategy classes that have been installed in advance in the 
NSL. Negotiation strategies are the formal descriptions of negotiation rules. They 
include complex computations, and are implemented by using game-theory or  
machine-learning techniques. When executing negotiations, the NAs use the NTR as a 
safe workplace, which can store intensive calculation history. When a NA puts forth a 
request, the NCA records what a NPA negotiates with a NDA into the NTR. The

Agent-Based Decision Making in the Electronic Marketplace: Interactive Negotiation 5 
NCA reports the final results to the NSR. A user does not need to be continuously 
connected to the e-marketplace site, because the NMA can send an e-mail to the user 
when a negotiation ends or the user can see the results through the NMA whenever he 
or she wants to. 
3.1   Negotiation Strategy 
A negotiation can be seen as a sequence of negotiation messages that are generated by 
the participating agents. An agent constantly receives and produces such messages. 
These messages are the results of intentional computations taken by the individual 
agents in order to achieve their goals. These intentional computations are modeled as 
negotiation strategies [16].  
To provide a variety of negotiation strategies currently available, the MANS/SNS 
maintains a library of preinstalled negotiation strategies and it allows a user to choose 
a particular type of strategies from the library. In order to set up the library, a negotia-
tion strategy literature has been examined and it was found that there were primarily 
two types of techniques which implement negotiation strategies: machine learning 
and game-theoretic techniques. The MANS/SNS is designed to allow agents to nego-
tiate using these techniques: 
 
• Machine learning techniques.  Several research papers use a genetic algorithm 
(GA) or evolutionary algorithm as a negotiation strategy. The GA models negotia-
tion strategies as sequential rules with a utility threshold. The GA often employs 
game theory, Q-learning, or finite state machines either separately or in conjunc-
tion. Fuzzy constraint-based reasoning, fuzzy relational analysis, and fuzzy rule  
inference with simple-weighting are also widely used. Bayesian learning and rule-
based knowledge are other choices as a negotiation strategy [17][18][19]. 
• Game-theoretic techniques.  Game-theoretic techniques encompass the adjusted-
winner (AW) procedure, multi-attribute utility function (MAUT), Pareto optimal 
solutions, the Kasbah model, and other scoring functions [20][21]. 
 
Fig. 2 illustrates how to define classes that encapsulate different types of strategies in 
Unified Modeling Language (UML) to construct a negotiation strategy library. A 
negotiation agent (NPA and NDA) includes negotiation behaviors which implement 
the Iterated Contract Net Interaction Protocol of the Foundations of Intelligent Physi-
cal Agents. This standard protocol allows multi-round iterative bidding. It enables 
negotiation agents to communicate with each other via a common interface, even 
though they have a variety of negotiation strategies. The owner of the negotiation 
agent can specify which type of negotiation strategy should be used. A negotiation 
agent maintains a connection with a negotiation strategy object to implement the 
chosen strategy. When an agent generates a negotiation message, the responsibility is 
forwarded to its strategy object. 
An abstract class, NS in Fig. 2 declar es an interface which is common to all sup-
ported strategies [22]. A subclass, ML specifies an interface that is unique to the 
strategies using machine learning techniques. A subclass GT clarifies an interface  
for the game-theoretic strategies. A negotiation agent uses these interfaces to call

6 S.H. Ha 
 
Fig. 2. The negotiation strategy library and its patterns expressed in the UML notation diagram 
concrete algorithms, including GA, fuzzy logic, or MAUT. When algorithms are 
called, an agent passes all required data and parameters to the algorithm objects. The 
hierarchy of negotiation strategy classes helps define a family of algorithms that ne-
gotiation agents can choose and reuse. Encapsulating an algorithm into a separate 
class, it is easier to adaptively modify the algorithm independent of the negotiation 
agents. The MANS/SNS implements a negotiation strategy ontology component that 
is responsible for managing the negotiation strategies in a modular fashion. The on-
tology is used to handle the registration of negotiation strategies and the notification 
of them to the users. It is also used to control versions of the strategies. 
3.2   Collaboration and Messaging between Agents 
Collaboration among member agents is comprised of the dynamic interaction of agents 
in the negotiation system. In this article, collaboration can occur in accordance with the 
seven negotiation stages: Negotiation agent creation (step 1); negotiation agent migra-
tion (step 2); negotiation strategy loading (step 3); negotiation process initiation (step 
4); negotiation progress (step 5); negotiation completion (step 6); and negotiation proc-
ess termination (step 7). Fig. 3 shows a collaboration diagram which is expressed in the 
agent unified modeling language, which explores associations among agents and the 
sequence of messages that are exchanged among agents during negotiation.  
The arrows represent messages and they are labeled with a dot-separated list of 
step numbers and sequence numbers. Messaging within the NCS occurs ten times, 
including two times with the AMS agent. Messaging within the NAES occurs 13 
times, including iterative proposals between the NPA and NDA. Messaging takes 
place five times between the NCA and NAES. Messaging between the NSA and 
NAES happens four times. Table 1 describes messaging details among agents in steps 
1 and 2, for example. The Agent Communication Language (ACL) of the FIPA is 
used as the communicative protocol [23].

Agent-Based Decision Making in the Electronic Marketplace: Interactive Negotiation 7 
 
Fig. 3. Collaboration diagram according to the messaging sequence among agents 
Table 1. Details of messages between agents 
Sequence Sender Receiver FIPA ACL Content 
1.1 NMA MCA request NA creation 
1.2 MCA AMS request NAES information 
1.3 AMS MCA inform NAES location 
1.4 MCA NMA inform, failure NA creation 
1.5 NMA MCA request-when NA migration 
2.1 MCA NCA query-if NA migration 
2.2 NCA MCA inform, failure, not-understood NA migration 
2.3 MCA NMA inform, failure NA migration 
4   Implementation of the MANS/SNS  
The MANS/SNS was developed under JADE 3.0, which has been fully implemented 
in Java language and has been a framework for the development of multi-agent sys-
tems in compliance with FIPA specifications [24]. The main container, Remote Man-
agement Agent (RMA), was used internally by JADE. The other agent containers, 
such as NSSS, NAES1, NAES2, and NCS, were connected to the main container via 
the remote method invocation registry, and provided a run-time environment for the 
execution of a set of negotiation agents. The MCA was in charge of generating nego-
tiation agents in the NCS, and generated NPA1 and NDA1 on NAES1 and NPA2 and 
NDA2 on NAES2. The followings were the input parameters to generate mobile ne-
gotiation agents for this system: agent information, such as user identifier and agent 
identifier; negotiable issues which both parties agree on and desirable values for the 
desirable item; negotiation constraints such as the number of maximum trials or other 
termination conditions; and a type of negotiation strategy, such as GA, fuzzy logic, or 
MAUT. When called upon to find an appropriate negotiation strategy, the NSA re-
ferred to the NSO component with the nego tiation specifications as specified. Given

8 S.H. Ha 
the information of a strategy class, the NSA located the class file from the NSL. The 
NSA created an instance of this negotiation strategy for a negotiation agent and sent it 
back to the NCA.  
Fig. 4(a) shows a GUI that allows the NCA in NAES to provide functions to submit 
requests for negotiation strategies. This GUI screen can be used to monitor all FIPA 
ACL messages issued from/to the NCA in order to request negotiation strategies.  
Fig. 4(b) illustrates a GUI screen that was developed to facilitate the management of 
negotiation strategies. The NSO contains information about negotiation strategy 
classes, such as strategy name, authors, version, algorithm, negotiable issues, descrip-
tion, and storage location. An e-marketplace provider or third parties could supply 
negotiation strategies in the form of Java’s JAR file in advance. Each JAR file contains 
a Java class, which implements a negotiation strategy. 
 
 
Fig. 4.  GUIs showing collaboration between a negotiation strategy agent and a negotiation 
control agent 
5   Conclusion  
In this article, a multi-agent negotiation system in an electronic commerce was pre-
sented. The system offered several characteristics over a typical mobile agent system: 
(1) the MANS/SNS supported bilateral, multi-issue negotiations; (2) the system  
allowed the NAs to migrate from the NCS to NAESs to reduce the workload of a 
server running an e-marketplace; (3) users could choose template strategies from the 
NSL to generate their own strategies. Therefore third parties could build templates for 
the e-marketplace intermediary; (4) the pattern of negotiation strategy classes made it 
easy for negotiation agents to reuse a family of algorithms. Encapsulating the algo-
rithms in the separate classes made it easier to modify the algorithms independent of 
its negotiation agent; (5) By keeping an agent database at the NCS, this enabled users 
to keep track of agents’ states, even if communication between the NCS and NAES 
was down; (6) To achieve the division of labor, the NTR stores the intermediate out-
comes and the NSR stores the final negotiation results. Table 2 summarizes the dif-
ferences between Nomad [13] and MANS/SNS.

Agent-Based Decision Making in the Electronic Marketplace: Interactive Negotiation 9 
Table 2. Differences between Nomad and MANS/SNS 
 Nomad MANS/SNS 
Agent creation Single item, single unit Bilateral, multiple issues 
Agent migration Concordia to eAuctionHouse/eMediator NAES servers 
Negotiation strategy Fixed strategy Adaptive strategy 
Agent database eAuctionHouse/eMediator NCS 
Bidding history Auction database NTR/NSR 
References 
1. Dignum, F., Corts, U.: Agent-mediated elect ronic commerce III: Current issues in agent-
based electronic commerce systems. Springer, Heidelberg (2001) 
2. Ye, Y., Liu, J., Moukas, A.: Agents in electronic commerce. Electron. Commer. Res. 1,  
9–14 (2001) 
3. Jennings, N.R., Bussmann, S.: Agent-based control system: why are they suited to engi-
neering complex systems. IEEE Contr. Syst. Mag. 23, 61–73 (2003) 
4. Bartolini, C., Preist, C., Jennings, N.R.: A software framework for automated negotiation. 
In: Choren, R., Garcia, A., Lucena, C., Romanovsky, A. (eds.) SELMAS 2004. LNCS, 
vol. 3390, pp. 213–235. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
5. van Bragt, D.D.B., Poutré, J.A.L.: Why agents for automated negotiations should be adap-
tive. Netnomics 5, 101–118 (2003) 
6. Guttman, R.H., Maes, P.: Agent-mediated integrative negotiation for retail electronic com-
merce. In: 1st International Workshop on Agent Mediated Electronic Trading on Agent 
Mediated Electronic Commerce, Seoul, Korea, pp. 70–90 (1998) 
7. Gray, R.S.: Agent Tcl: A flexible and secure mobile-agent system, Technical report. Dart-
mouth College, Hanover, NH (1998) 
8. Peine, H., Stolpmann, T.: The architecture of the Ara platform for mobile agents.  
In: Rothermel, K., Popescu-Zeletin, R. (eds.) MA 1997. LNCS, vol. 1219, pp. 50–61. 
Springer, Heidelberg (1997) 
9. Wong, D., Paciorek, N., Walsh, T., DiCelie, J., Young, M., Peet, B.: Concordia: An infra-
structure for collaborating mobile agents. In: Rothermel, K., Popescu-Zeletin, R. (eds.) 
MA 1997. LNCS, vol. 1219, pp. 86–97. Springer, Heidelberg (1997) 
10. Baumann, J., Hohl, F., Rothermel, K., Straßer, M.: Mole-concepts of a mobile agent sys-
tem. In: Milojicic, D., Douglis, F., Wheeler, R.  (eds.) Mobility: processes, computers, and 
agents, pp. 535–554. ACM press/Addison-Wesley Publishing, New York (1999) 
11. Johansen, D., van Renesse, R., Schneider, F.B.: An introduction to the TACOMA distrib-
uted system. Technical report, University of Tromso (1995) 
12. Tkito, R., Karmouch, A.: SHIPMAI: A secure and high performance mobile agent infra-
structure. In: 2000 Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering,  
pp. 1027–1031. IEEE press, New York (2000) 
13. Sandholm, T.: eMediator: A next generation electronic commerce server. Comput.  
Intell. 18, 656–676 (2002) 
14. Lin, F.-C., Kuo, C.-N.: Cooperative multi-agent negotiation for electronic commerce based 
on mobile agents. In: 2002 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernet-
ics, pp. 532–537. IEEE press, New York (2002) 
15. Srivastava, V., Mohapattra, P.K.J.: PLAMUN: a platform for multi-user negotiation. Elec-
tron. Commer. R. A. 2, 339–349 (2003)

10 S.H. Ha 
16. Jennings, N.R., Faratin, P., Lomuscio, A.R., Parsons, S., Wooldridge, M.J., Sierra, C.: 
Automated negotiation: prospects, methods and challenges. Group Decis. Negot. 10,  
199–215 (2001) 
17. Gerding, E., van Bragt, D., Poutré, H.L.: Multi-issue negotiation processes by evolutionary 
simulation, validation and social extensions. Computational Economics 22, 39–63 (2003) 
18. Dzeng, R.-J., Lin, Y.-C.: Intelligent agents for supporting construction procurement nego-
tiation. Expert Syst. Appl. 27, 107–119 (2004) 
19. Bădică, C., B ădiţă, A., Ganzha, M., Iordache, A., Paprzycki, M.: Rule-based framework 
for automated negotiation: initial implementation. In: Adi, A., Stoutenburg, S., Tabet, S. 
(eds.) RuleML 2005. LNCS, vol. 3791, pp. 193–198. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
20. Neubert, R., Görlitz, O., Teich, T.: Automated negotiations of supply contracts for flexible 
production networks. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 89, 175–187 (2004) 
21. Chen, J.-H., Chao, K.-M., Godwin, N., Soo, V.-W.: Combining cooperative and  
non-cooperative automated negotiations. Inform. Syst. Front. 7, 391–404 (2005) 
22. Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., Vlissides, J.: Design patterns. Addison-Wesley, Read-
ing (1995) 
23. Wooldridge, M.: An introduction to multiagent systems. John Wiley and Sons, UK (2002) 
24. Chmiel, K., Tomiak, D., Gawinecki, M., Karczmarek, P., Szymczak, M., Paprzycki, M.: 
Testing the efficiency of JADE agent platform. In: 3rd International Symposium on Paral-
lel and Distributed Computing, pp. 49–56. IEEE Computer Society, Washington (2004)

Modeling and Verifying Business Interactions
via Commitments and Dialogue Actions
Mohamed El-Menshawy1,J amalB entahar2, andR a c hida Dssouli2
1 Concordia University, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Canada
2 Concordia University, Concordia Institute for Information Systems Eng., Canada
m_elme@encs.concordia.ca,
{bentahar,dssouli}@ciise.concordia.ca
Abstract. A variety of business interactions in open environments can
be captured in terms of creation and manipulation of social commitments
among the agents. Such interactions include B2B and B2C processes and
contracts as realized via web services and other technologies. Also, the
interaction protocols are formulated in terms of commitments to regulate
agents’ behaviors. However, such protocols can beneﬁt from a stronger
treatment of ﬂexible interactions via dialogue actions to capture a rich va-
riety of real-life business scenarios. This paper addresses the challenges of
modeling and verifying business interactions using commitments and ac-
tions on such commitments augmented with dialogue actions to reconcile
conﬂicts and reason about the validity of such commitments. We intro-
duce the NetBill protocol taken from e-business domain to demonstrate
the speciﬁcation of a new class of formal protocols for agent negotiation.
Finally, we use the MCMAS symbolic model checker to automatically
verify this protocol against some given properties. We present the imple-
mentation and experimental results of this protocol and its veriﬁcation.
1 Introduction
Business processes in open environments such as theInternet ofteni n v o l vec om-
plex andr ich interactionsa mongt wo orm ore services created by autonomous
and heterogeneous business partners.I f we abstract these business partners us-
ingm ulti-agents ystems (MAS), wec ani dentify a number ofc h allenging issues
such as modelinga nd verifying business interactions.I nteraction is one oft h e
majort opics in multi-agent business processes as it ist h em ain way for agents
to coordinate andc ooperate with onea nother.I n the early days ofm ulti-agent
research, ap romising way to model agent interaction was widely inspired by
Searle’s speech acts theory. This isc alled the mental approach that focuses on
some concepts of interacting agents such as beliefs, desires and intentions.T hese
notionsh aveb e en behind the prominent AgentC ommunication Language (ACL)
proposalss u c ha sKQML and FIPA-ACL. However,i t became apparentt h a ta
semantics of ACL based on the mental concepts would necessarily impose signif-
icantr e s t rictions on the operational behavior of agents andm a king itg enerally
diﬃcultt ov erifyw hether an agent isa c tinga c cordingt o such a semantics or
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 11–21, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

12 M. El-Menshawy, J. Bentahar, and R. Dssouli
not [3,11]. Fore xample,w eh ave no wayo fk nowing whether an agenta c t u ally
believes a certa in fact since wed on oth ave access t o agents’i nternal states.
Thisp roblem isk nown as the “semantics veriﬁcation” problem [17]. In the past
years, social approaches haveb e en adopted too vercome the shortcomings in the
mental approach [3,11,18]. A social commitment isa n engagementb e tween two
agents: the creditor who commits to ac ourse ofa c tion and the debtor on be-
half of whomt h ea c tion isd one.T hus, the main notion ofs ocial semantics is
to aa b s t r a c taway from agents’i nternal states andp rovide meanings to agent
message exchanges with theire ﬀects on the commitments.M oreover, as ocial se-
mantics has proven to be a viable approach to specify commitmentp rotocols in
which agents’ actions on commitments reﬂect the protocol’sp rogress.A lthough
commitments underpin such protocols with ﬂexibility and veriﬁability[ 6 , 1 6 , 9 ]
without over-constraints on the interactions [18], the currentf ormulations of
commitmentp rotocols (e.g., commitmentm a c hines [16,18]) cannotb eu s e dto
model dialogicaln egotiation processes.N egotiation isap r ominentt ype of inter-
action used to reconcilec onﬂicts among interacting agents,w hich try to reach a
mutual agreement with each other [4,14,15] as in real-life business scenarios.
The aim oft hisp a p e rist o address the abovec h allenges by proposingaf r a m e-
work that uniﬁes social commitmenta c tionsa ndd ialogue actionst o model and
verify business interactionsa mongt h einteracting agents.M ore speciﬁcally, we
(1) advance the commitmentm odelw e introduced in [8] byi ntegratingd ialogue
actions (e.g., challenge, defend,j ustify), which are used to reason about the va-
lidityo fc ommitments andt o formally specify a new class ofp rotocolsf or agent
negotiation; (2) address the automatic veriﬁcation ofa n examplef romt hisc lass
(NetBill protocol) against some desirablep roperties such as reachab ility and
liveness usingt h e MCMAS symbolicm odel checker [10]; and (3) presentt h e
implementation ande xperimental results oft hisp rotocol and its veriﬁcation.
The remainder oft hisp a p e ris organized as follows.I nS ection 2,w e introduce
our conceptual framework ofa u tonomous interacting agents.I nS ection 3, we
proceed to presenta new class off ormal protocolsf or agent negotiation using
commitments andd ialogue actions.I nS ection 4,w em ove on to describe the
veriﬁcation ofac oncrete protocol usingt h e MCMAS symbolicm odel checker
along with the implementation ande xperimental results oft hisp rotocol. We
conclude the paper in Section 5 with a discussion ofr elated work.
2 Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework wep ropose is characterized by gathering:( 1 ) the
social commitments that capture bus iness interactionsa mongt h e interacting
agents; and (2) the dialogue actionst h a tweu s eto reason about the validityo f
commitments andr e concilec onﬂicts of interests among negotiating agents.
2.1 Social Commitments
Social commitments are e ngagements in the form of business contracts made
byo ne agent, the debtor, andd irected towards another agent, the creditor, so

Modeling and Verifying Business Interactions 13
that some facts are true [8,12]. To clarify the notion ofc ommitments that are
the main part of the proposed protocol (see Sect.3), let us consider the NetBill
protocol, which optimizes the transaction protocol fort h es ellinga ndd eliveryo f
goods, as a runninge xample.T he protocol rules interactionsa mongt wo agents:
am e r c h ant (Mer) andac u s tomer (Cus) as well as NetBill server that is only
involved in the payment stage.A typical protocol runi sc omposed of three stages.
1. Request andR e ply. The customer requests a quote fors ome goods deﬁned by
anI tem ID (IteID): PriceRequest(IteID).T hisr e q u e s tisf ollowed by the
merchantr e ply with the requested price quote: PriceQuote(IteID,Quote).
2. Goods Delivery. The customer requests the goods: GoodsRequest(IteID,
Quote),i f he accepts the received price quote andt h en the merchantd elivers
the goods in an encrypted format: Deliver(Crypt(IteID,Key),Quote).
3. Payment.T he customer sends the agreed amount ofm oney as an electronic
payment order to the NetBill server,w hich forwards the receipt to the mer-
chant: Pay(Crypt(IteID,Key),Quote).T he merchant after rece ivingt h e
payment, he appends the decryption key fort h egoods with the receipt to
the customer: Receipt(Decrypt (IteID,Key),Price) .
This original speciﬁcation isq uite rigid because itc annoth andlet h enatural sit-
uations where exceptionsc an take place [16,18]. Consequently, the“commitment
machines” are proposed to tackle these shortcomings andp roduce more ﬂexible
protocols.F ore xample, ac u s tomer sendinga n“accept”message before receiving
ap rice quote (as in case oft r u s t)o ram e r c h ants endingt h egoods priort o the
customer sendingp ayment (as in at rialo ﬀer). In the following,w e introduce
the formal deﬁnition ofc onditional commitments.
Deﬁnition 1. Conditional commitment is denoted bySCc(Ag1,A g2,τ,φ ) where
the debtor Ag1 commits to the creditorAg2 to bring about the contentφ when the
condition τ is satisﬁed. The formulae φ and τ a r ee x p r e s s e di nt h es a m el o g i c .
Intuitively, the conditional commitmentc a p t u r e sm any interested business situ-
ationss u c ha swhen an agent wants too n l ycommita bout some facts when a cer-
tain condition iss a tisﬁed.W hen the condition ist r u e(⊤), then the conditional
commitment ist r ansformed into unconditional commitment,w hich isd enoted by
SC(Ag1,A g2,⊤,φ). The commitments can be manipulated orm odiﬁed when the
interaction progresses.H ereafter,w ed e ﬁnet h ea c tionsu s e dto manipulate com-
mitments inspired from [12]w here Ag1,A g2,A g3 denote agent names.
1. Create(Ag1,SC c(Ag1,A g2,τ,φ )) establishes the c ommitment.T hisa c tion
cano n l ybe performed by the debtor oft h ecommitment.
2. Fulfill (Ag1,SC (Ag1,A g2,⊤,φ)) satisﬁes the commitment.A lso, thisa c tion
cano n l ybe performed by the debtor oft h ecommitment,w hich meanst h e
commitment has successfully been carried out within as p e ciﬁed deadline.
3. Vi o l a t e(Ag1,SC (Ag1,A g2,⊤,φ)) violates the commitment.S peciﬁcally, this
action means that the debtor oft h ecommitment isf ailed to carryo ut the
commitmentb y the deadline.

14 M. El-Menshawy, J. Bentahar, and R. Dssouli
4. Assign(Ag2,A g3,SC c(Ag1,A g2,τ,φ ),τ ′,φ ′) assignsa new agent as the cred-
itor oft h ecommitment.S peciﬁcally, the creditor Ag2 may assign a new cred-
itor Ag3 to enableh imt o beneﬁt fromt h ecommitment. Operationally, the
currentc ommitment isr eleased anda new commitment SCc(Ag1,A g3,τ ′,φ ′)
isc r e a t e dfor which Ag3 is the creditor.
5. Delegate(Ag1,A g3,SC c(Ag1,A g2,τ,φ ),τ ′,φ ′)i sp e r formed by the debtor of
the commitmentt o replace himself with another agent Ag3 so that Ag3
becomes responsiblet o carryo ut the commitment. Operationally,the current
commitment is withdrawn, anda new commitment SCc(Ag3,A g2,τ ′,φ ′)i s
created where Ag3 is the debtor.
Notice that,w eg ivea newo perational semantics fort hird-party actions: assign
andd elegate.F ore xample,i ft h ec u s tomer commits to pay$ 200 to the mer-
chant in two days.A fter oned ay, the customer, fors ome reasons, delegates this
commitmentt o another say Bank to pay$ 200 to the merchant.T hus, customer
withdrawsf romt h ec ommitmenta nda new commitmentb e tweenB anka nd
merchant isc r e a t e dto pay$ 200 after only oned ay[ 8]. Thiss e m antics ise n-
tirely diﬀerentf romt h eoneg iveni n[ 18], which ignores the relationshipa mong
the original commitmentc ontenta nd the delegated one.T o model the NetBill
protocol, wec an use the commitmentm a c hines introduced in [6] where the com-
mitments represent states anda c tions.T he meaning ofas t a t eisg iven by the
commitments that hold in this state where a state isad e s c ription oft h eworld.
The meaning ofa n action isg iven by how itm anipulates commitments.F or
example, SCc(Cus,Mer,Deliver (IteID ),Pa y(m)), which means that the cus-
tomer commits to payinga mount m if he receives the requested goods, IteID .
Formally, the commitmentm a c hinec an be deﬁned as a tra nsition system:
TS =⟨S, Lab, AGT, ACT,
AGT:ACT
−−−−−−−→,s0⟩where S isas e tof states; Lab : S→ 2Φ
where Φ isas e tofa tomicp roposition, ist h elabeling state function; AGT isas e t
of interacting agents; ACT isas e tofa c tions;
AGT:ACT
−−−−−−−→⊆ S×AGT×ACT×S isa
total transition relation; and s0 ist h einitial state.A lthough promising, previous
proposals on the commitmentm a c hines are nots u ﬃ ciently general because they
cannotb eu s e dto model the negotiation amongt h einteracting agents.I n the
following,w ee nhance the commitmentm a c hines with dialogue actions.
2.2 Dialogue Actions
Dialogue games are well-formed sequences ofd ialogue actionst h a tc an be com-
posed to model more ﬂexiblea ndc omplex dialogues (e.g., persuasion, negoti-
ation orb oth). Such games ha veb e en proposed as a bas isf org overningt h e
interaction among agents in MAS with the ﬂexility tov erify agents’ behaviors
[14,15,4]. More speciﬁcally, here dialogue actionsa r eak ind of game actionsa p-
plied byi nteracting agents to reason about the validityo fc ommitments and
to enhance “commitmentm a c hines”w ith a decision mechanism that allowsa u-
tonomous agents to choose the actions that they will perform.T he meaning of
the set ofd ialogue actions on commitments iss hown in Table 1.

Modeling and Verifying Business Interactions 15
Table 1. The meaning of the dialogue actions
Dialogue Actions Meaning
Entry-dialogue One or many special actions used to enter the dialogue.
Accept(Ag2,SC (Ag1,A g2, ⊤ ,φ )) Ag2 accepts the commitment content φ,s ot h a ti tc r e a t e s
a commitment with the same content φ in the next state.
Refuse(Ag2,SC (Ag1,A g2, ⊤ ,φ )) Ag2 refuses the commitment content φ,s ot h a ti t
becomes committed to the negation of the same content
(i.e., ¬φ) in the next state.
Defend(Ag1,SC (Ag1,A g2, ⊤ ,φ 1),φ 2) Ag1 defends its commitment content φ1 with φ2 against
an attack, then it becomes committed to φ1 in the next
state as long as φ2 holds.
Attack(Ag2,SC (Ag1,A g2, ⊤ ,φ 1),φ 2) Ag2 attacks the commitment content φ1 of Ag1 by the
content φ2, so that it becomes committed to ¬φ1 in the
next state as long as φ2 holds.
Challenge(Ag2,SC (Ag1,A g2, ⊤ ,φ )) Ag2 challenges the commitment content φ of Ag1,s ot h a t
Ag1 justiﬁes the content of its commitment in the next
state.
Justify(Ag1,SC (Ag1,A g2, ⊤ ,φ 1),φ 2) Ag1 justiﬁes its commitment content φ1 with φ2 against
a challenge, so that it becomes committed to φ1 in the
next state as long as φ2 holds.
Exit-dialogue A special action used to exit the dialogue.
3 Modeling Social Negotiation Protocol
In this section, wep r e s enta new formal protocol for agent negotiation based on
our conceptual framework (see Sect.2). In particular,o ur protocol supports two
types ofc ommitments: social andd ialectical commitments.T he former one is
about what ist o be done [13] whilet h elatter one, as in argumentation theory
[14], isc oncerned with arguinga bout the agreement.F ore xample,i n the NetBill
protocol, as longa st h egoods are in as tock, then the customer cann egotiate
the price oft h e s egoods with the merchantu singad ialectical commitment but
when the customer andm e r c h ant reach a mutua l agreementa bout thisp rice,
then the commitment that the cust omer created t o pay the speciﬁed price is
called a social commitment.
3.1 Protocol Speciﬁcation
Our socialn egotiation protocol (SNP) merges a set ofd ialogue games, commit-
menta c tionsa ndd ialogue actions.I n particular, the protocol uses four dialogues
games: the main game (MG), the defense game (DFG), the challenge game (CHG)
and the attack game (ATG). Thisp rotocol begins with the entry-dialogue action
followed by the dialectical commitment (DC), which iss imilar to as ocial com-
mitment but with the possibility ton egotiate the condition and/orc ontent of
the commitmentf ollowed by the main dialogue game (MG) and the protocol ends
with doingt h eexit-dialogue action.
The main dialogue game beg ins with accepting, refusing orc h allengingt h e
content oft h edialectical commitment.A ccepting MG meansc r e a tingt h esocial
commitment (CR-sc), which itc oulde ither fulﬁlled (FUL), violated (VIO), as-
signed (ASS)o rd elegated (DEL). The delegated (resp. the assigned) commitment

16 M. El-Menshawy, J. Bentahar, and R. Dssouli
can be accepted or refused.W hen MG is refused, then the interacting agentc an
open the negotiation dialogue either by the defense game, attack game orb y
challenge game to reach a mutual agreement.T he defense game (DFG) consists
of the defense-action that the debtoru s e sto persuade the creditorf ollowed ei-
ther by callingt h em ain dialogue game that openst h eﬂexibility to the creditor
to accept, refuse orc h allenge thisd e f ense orb y direct refusingt hisd e f ense.T he
attack game (ATG) enables agents to attack the commitmentc ontent of other
agents orr e f u singt hisc ontent.T he challenge game (CHG) speciﬁes that each
challenge action must be combined with justiﬁcation action followed by calling
the main dialogue game orr e f u singt his justiﬁcation. The formal speciﬁcation
of SNP protocol can be deﬁned usinga BNF-like grammar with meta-symbols:
“::=” and “|” fort h ec hoice and “;” fora c tion sequence (see Table2 ).
Table 2. The speciﬁcation of social negotiation protocol
SNP ::= Entry-dialogue; DC; MG; Exit-dialogue
MG ::= ACC | REF |CHG
ACC ::= CR-sc; FUL | VIO | (ASS | DEL; ACC | REF-ad)
REF-ad ::= refusal-action;( ASS | DEL; ACC | REF-ad)
REF ::= DFG | ATG | CHG
DFG ::= defense-action; (MG | refusal-action)
CHG ::= challenge-action; justification-action; (MG | refusal-action)
ATG ::= attack-action; (MG | refusal-action)
The protocol terminates when all created social commitments are resolved (i.e.,
when the social commitments are violated orf ulﬁlled)o rt h einteracting agents
did notr e a c hto a mutual agreement (i.e., by making refuse action). Because it
isp rohibited fort h etwo agents to play the same action duringt h enegotiation,
the termination of the protocol ise nsured.I n fact, the aboves p e ciﬁcation can
be represented by at r ansition system andc ompiled into aﬁ nite state machine
 
Customer Merchant
NetBill 
Server
(1) Price Request
(2) Price Quote
(4) Pay (5) Receipt
(6) Deliver 
(7) Receipt
(3) Accept
Accept
NetBill 
Server
Negotiation
Dialogue 
Games
Agreement
Terminal
State
Customer Merchant
(1) Price Request
(2) Price Quote
(6) Deliver 
(7) Receipt
(3) Pay
Yes
No
Yes
(4) Pay
No
(5) Receipt
Fig. 1. The original NetBill protocol (left) and enhanced NetBill protocol (right)

Modeling and Verifying Business Interactions 17
at design-time (see Fig.2). Figure 1 depicts the transition diagram oft h eoriginal
Netbill protocol andt h eenhanced one where the negotiation dialogue games are
added toi ncrease the ﬂexibilityo f the protocol that arisinga tr un time.
4 Verifying Social Negotiation Protocol
4.1 Symbolic Model Checking
Weu s eMCMAS, as ymbolicm odel checker [10] form ulti-agents ystems,w hich
takes in input an SNP speciﬁcation deﬁned as a tra nsition system andas e t of
formulae describingp roperties (see Sect.4.2) to be veriﬁed.T he input of MC-
MAS is writteni nI S P L( I nterpreted Systems Programming Language). MCMAS
evaluates the truth value oft h e s eformulae usinga lgorithms based on OBDDs
andp roduces counterexamples forf alse formulae and witnesses fort r u eformu-
lae.AM A S speciﬁed in ISPL isc omposed ofa n environment agenta ndas e t
ofs t andard agents. Environment agent isu s e dto describe boundary conditions
and observation variables shared by standard agents and ism odeled as standard
agents.S tandard agent ism odeled as non-deterministica u tomaton in the form
ofas e t of local states, as e t ofa c tions, ap rotocol function anda n evolution
function. The main step in our veriﬁcation workﬂow ist o translate protocol
speciﬁcation intoI S P Lprogram.T hisb e gins with translatingas e t of interact-
ing agents into standard agents in Agent section andc ommitments intol ocal
variables in Vars section. Such variables are ofe numeration type includinga ll
possiblec ommitments states (see Fig.2), which verifyw hether the protocol is in
ac onformant state or not.T he actions on commitments andd ialogue actions
are directly expressed in Actions section where such actions work as constraints
to trigger ors topt r ansitionsa mong states.
In order to simplify the notations in the next section, we use the messages
in Fi g. 2a sa c tions in the SNP protocol without c onsideringt h ea s sociated
parameters.
 
S0 S1
S10
S2
S3
S8
S7
S13 S14
S11
Cus: price
Request
Mer: price
Quote
Cus: Accept
Cus: Attack
Mer: Attack
Mer: Attack
Mer:Refund
Mer:Not DeliverCus: Pay
Mer: Deliver
S12
Cus: Refuse
Cus: Accept
S4
Cus: Not deliver
S18
Cus: Delegate 
to Bank
Bank: 
S17
Mer1: price Quote
Cus: Challenge
Mer: Justify
S9
Cus: Challenge Cus: Refuse
S15
Cus: Defend
S16
Mer: Defend
Mer: Defend
Cus: Refuse
S5
S6
Mer: Receipt
Mer: Assign to Mer1
Cus: Refuse
Cus: Accept
Cus: Accept
Fig. 2. Actions of the SNP Protocol

18 M. El-Menshawy, J. Bentahar, and R. Dssouli
Table 3. OBDD Statistics Comparison
First Exp.
 Second Exp.
 Third Exp.
OBDD Variables
 30
 42
 54
The Size of Model
 109
 1013
 1016
Number of Agents
 2
 3
 4
Total Time(Sec)
 ≈ 0.32
 ≈ 1
 ≈ 2
4.2 Experimental Results
In this section, we introduce some temporal properties,w hich describe the for-
mulae that verify the correctness oft h eSNP protocol in Formulae section oft h e
ISPL usingC omputationalT ree Logic (CTL ). The syntax ands e m antic of CTL
are giveni n[ 7]. Following,w eu s et h et e m poralo perators: AF (resp. EF ) means
in the future F ofa ll (some) possiblep a t h sA (resp. E) andGm e ansg lobally
i.e., in all states, so EG (resp. AG) stands forg lobally in some (all) paths.
1. Reachability: ap a r ticular situation can be reached fromt h einitial state
vias ome computation sequences.F ore xample, fromt h es t a t ewhere the Cus
agentr e q u e s t saq uote fors ome goods,w ec an reach a state that depicts the
deliveryo ft h egoods: AF(priceRequest(Cus)→ EFDeliver (Mer)).
2. Safety: safety meanss ome bad situation will never occur.F ore xample,i n
all paths the Cus agenta lwayss ends the payment, but the Mer agent will
note ventually deliver the goods in all paths startingf romt h es t a t ewhere
the Cus agenth a sp ayed: AG(¬(Pay (Cus) ∧ AF(AG¬Deliver(Mer))).
3. Liveness: liveness meanss omethingg ood will eventually occur.F ore xample,
in all paths where the Mer agent ise ventually in “Not Deliver” state, then
he will eventually, in all paths startinga tt his state, refund the paymentt o
the Cus agent: AF(Not Deliver (Mer)→ AFRefund (Mer)).
In the following,w ep r e s entt h er e s ults oft h r e eexperiments1 weh avec onducted
tov erify the socialn egotiation protocol explained in Sect.3 with the MCMAS
model checker.I n the ﬁrst experiment we only consider two agents: Cus and Mer
agents,i n the second one we add the agentt ow hich a commitment isa s signed
(say Mer1) and in the third one wea d dt h ea g entt ow hich a commitment is
delegated (say Bank). Table 3 depicts the re levantr e s ults using MCMAS in
which these results are reported on a laptopr unning Windows Vista Business
on Intel Core2 Duo CPU T5450 1.66 GHz with 2.00GB memory. To evaluate
the performance ofm odel checking,w e need to analyze the state space (i.e., the
model size) andt otal time (i.e., the time ofb uildingt h emodel and veriﬁcation
time). Fore xample, the number of Booleanv ariables required to encode this
protocol, in the third experiment,i s 54 Booleanv ariables, then the size oft h e
model( w ith 4 agents)i s2 54 ≈ 1016.T he ﬁfth row in Table 3 showst h etotal
1 The source code for these experiments is available from:
http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bentahar/publications/code/MCMAS-KES.zip

Modeling and Verifying Business Interactions 19
time results in the veriﬁcation oft h e SNP protocol. Thist ime increases when
augmentingt h enumber of agents from2t o 4 agents.T he cause oft his ist h a t
the number ofr e a c h a ble states andt h esize oft h emodel are increased whilst the
veriﬁcation time in the three experiments is approximately the same (< 0.01s).
5 Related Work and Discussion
In thisp a p e r,w ee nhanced commitmentm a c hines [18] to specify as ocialn e-
gotiation protocol that combines the ma in functionalityo fb oth commitment
protocolsa ndd ialogue game protocols. Our approach captures real-life business
scenariosa long with automatic veriﬁcation oft hisp rotocol usings ymbolicm odel
checking.A lso, itu nderpinsm ore compact representation with positiver e s ults
revealingt h ea bility to tackle large state spaces of 1016.
In the standard literature ofd e ﬁningc ommitmentp rotocols,Y o lum and Singh
[18] haveu s e dcommitment operationst o show how to builda nde xecute com-
mitmentp rotocolsa ndh ow to reason about them usinge ventc alculus.T heir
approach only indirectly modelst h ef ulﬁllment ofac ommitment.W i n ikoﬀ et al.
[16] haveu s e dt h eeventc alculus to enhance some of Yolum and Singh’s work
byi mprovingh ow the commitments are modeled without studyingc ompilation
of the protocols. Chopra and Singh [6] havec onsidered non-monotonict h eoryo f
action based on causall ogic without discussing the detailsc ompilation ofc a u s al
logic into at r ansition system. Recently, Singh [13] has delineated the m odel-
theoretics e m antics ofc ommitments by postulatings ome rules as ways ofu sing
andr e a soning with commitments.T hism odel combines two commitments (social
andd ialectical), in the sense that when ac ommitmenta rises within an argument
andt h econtent iss a tisﬁed with the same argume nt, then social commitment
wouldb es a tisﬁed.H o wever, thism odel formally includes only the semantics of
fulﬁllingc ommitments. Our approach belongs to the same line of research, but it
complements the abovef r a m eworks by usingam ore compatible logic with agent
open choices,w hich isC TL logicc ompared toL i near TemporalL ogic (LTL) logic
used in [13]. Wea lsoi ntroduced other actionsa long with automatic veriﬁcation
of interaction protocolsu sings ymbolicm odel checking.
In terms of verifyingc ommitmentp rotocols, Cheng [5] has introduced model
checkingu sing Promelaa nd Spin tov erify commitment-based business protocols
andt h eirc ompositionsb a s e don LTL logic.T his approach isd iﬀerentf rom ours
that usesMCMAS, which isc omputationally more eﬃcientt h an automata-based
model checkers such as Spin. Baldoni et al. [2] have addressed the pr oblem of
verifyingt h a tagiven protocol implementation usinga logicall anguage conforms
toi ts AUML speciﬁcation. Also, Alberti et al. [1] havec onsidered the problem of
verifying on the ﬂy the compliance of the agents’sb e h aviort o protocolss p e ciﬁed
usinga logic-based framework.T hese approaches are diﬀerentf romt h et e c hnique
presented here in the sense that they are notb a s e don model checkinga ndd o
not address the problem of verifying ifap r otocol satisﬁes some given properties.
To specify dialogue game protocols, the dialogue games aima t oﬀeringm ore
ﬂexibility by combiningd iﬀerents m all games to construct more complex pro-
tocols.W alton [15] has deﬁned a language of Multi-Agentd ialogue Protocols

20 M. El-Menshawy, J. Bentahar, and R. Dssouli
(MAP) to express interactionsa mongag r oup of agents in the form ofad ia-
logue.H e has applied model checking in order tov erify the correctness oft h e s e
protocolsu singt h eSpin model checker.H eu s e ddialogical commitments rather
than social commitments that reﬂect positionst a k eni n dialogue as well as his
negotiation protocol does not support multi-party actions.B entahar et a l. [3]
haves p e ciﬁed a dialogue game protocol as a transition system in which transi-
tionsa r elabeled with communicativea c t s.T heir veriﬁcation method isb a s e d
on the translation off ormulae into a variant ofa lternativet r e ea u tomata called
Alternating B¨uchiT ableau Automata (ABTA), which suﬀers fromt h e“state
explosion”problem.B entahar and Jihad [4] haved e ﬁned and implemented a ne-
gotiation protocol based on persuasivea r g u m entation andc ommitments without
consideringc onditional commitments andm ulti-party actions.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thankt h er eviewers fort h eir valuable
comments.J amalB entahar would like to thank NaturalS ciences andE ngineering
Research Council ofC anada (NSERC) and FondQ u ´ebecoisd e la recherche sur
las oci´et´ee t lac ulture (FQRSC) fort h eirﬁ nancial support.
References
1. Alberti, M., Chesani, F., Gavanelli, M., Lamma, E., Mello, P., Torroni, P.: Compli-
ance veriﬁcation of agent interaction: a logic-based software tool. Applied Artiﬁcial
Intelligence 20(2-4), 133–157 (2006)
2. Baldoni, M., Baroglio, C., Martelli, A., Patti, V., Schifanella, C.: Verifying protocol
conformance for logic-based communicating agents. In: Leite, J., Torroni, P. (eds.)
CLIMA 2004. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3487, pp. 196–212. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
3. Bentahar, J., Meyer, J.-J.C., Wan, W.: Model checking communicative agent-
based systems. Knowledge-Based Systems, Special Issue on Intelligent Software
Design 22(3), 142–159 (2009)
4. Bentahar, J., Labban, J.: An argumentation-driven model for ﬂexible and eﬃcient
persuasive negotiation. Group Decision and Negotiation Journal (2009)
5. Cheng, Z.: Verifying commitment based business protocols and their compositions:
Model checking using promela and spin. PhD thesis, North Carolina State Univer-
sity (2006)
6. Chopra, A.K., Singh, M.P.: Nonmonotonic commitment machines. In: Dignum,
F.P.M. (ed.) ACL 2003. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 2922, pp. 183–200. Springer, Heidelberg
(2004)
7. Clarke, E.M., Grumberg, O., Peled, D.A.: Model checking. The MIT Press,
Cambridge (1999)
8. El-Menshawy, M., Bentahar, J., Dssouli, R.: An integrated semantics of social
commitments and associated operations. In: 2nd Multi-Agent Logics, Languages,
and Organisations Federated Workshops MALLOW 2009 (LADS), vol. 494 (2009)
9. Fornara, N., Colombetti, M.: Operational speciﬁcation of a commitment-based
agent communication language. In: 1st AAMAS 2002, pp. 535–542. ACM Press,
New York (2002)
10. Lomuscio, A., Raimondi, F.: MCMAS: A model checker for multi-agent systems.
In: Hermanns, H., Palsberg, J. (eds.) TACAS 2006. LNCS, vol. 3920, pp. 450–454.
Springer, Heidelberg (2006)

Modeling and Verifying Business Interactions 21
11. Singh, M.P.: Agent communication languages: Rethinking the principles. IEEE
Computer Society 31(2), 40–47 (1998)
12. Singh, M.P.: An ontology for commitments in multi-agent systems: Toward a uni-
ﬁcation of normative concepts. In: AI and Law, vol. 7, pp. 97–113 (1999)
13. Singh, M.P.: Semantical considerations on dialectical and pratical commitments.
In: 23rd AAAI, pp. 176–181 (2008)
14. Walton, D.N., Krabbe, E.C.W.: Commitment in dialogue: Basic concepts of inter-
personal reasoning. State University of New York Press, NY (1995)
15. Walton, D.N.: Model checking agent dialogues. In: Leite, J., Omicini, A., Torroni,
P., Yolum, p. (eds.) DALT 2004. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3476, pp. 132–147. Springer,
Heidelberg (2005)
16. Winikoﬀ, M., Liu, W., Harland, J.: Enhancing commitment machines. In: Leite, J.,
Omicini, A., Torroni, P., Yolum, p. (eds.) DALT 2004. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3476,
pp. 198–220. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
17. Wooldridge, M.: Semantic issues in the veriﬁcation of agent communication Lan-
guages. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 3(1), 9–31 (2000)
18. Yolum, P., Singh, M.P.: Commitment machines. In: Meyer, J.-J.C., Tambe, M.
(eds.) ATAL 2001. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 2333, pp. 235–247. Springer, Heidelberg
(2002)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 22–31, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Personalized Support for Management of Financial 
Instruments by Means of Software Agents 
Jarogniew Rykowski 
Department of Information Technology, the Poznan University of Economics 
Mansfelda 4, 60-854 Poznan, Poland 
Tel./Fax: +48 61 848-0549 
rykowski@kti.ue.poznan.pl 
Abstract. In the paper a new approach is proposed to support personal man-
agement of financial instruments such as e-bank accounts and investment funds. 
The approach is based on using personalized software agents. A set of user 
agents implements an idea of a personal financial advisor, starting from the root 
– the main agent-interface to a transactional system of a financial institution, via 
marketing agents responsible for the generation of personal financial advices 
based on current user activities, and finishing on specialized agents-interfaces to 
contact the personal access devices of the users. An “intelligence” of the agents 
makes it possible to send the requests and gather the answers to/from the agents 
in different forms, and using different communication channels, natural-
language-based communication included. 
Keywords: Software agents, personalization, e-banking, e-finances. 
1   Introduction 
Recently we observe a boom of offers of diverse financial instruments: bank savings, 
investment funds, credits and credit lines, bonds and shares, etc. Many financial insti-
tutions, not only traditional banks, are providing different financial instruments  
for mass clients. Despite the business model used, the main goal of introducing  
consulting services is to provide the best advice how to invest client’s money – the 
consulting companies try to help clients in optimizing their ways of money invest-
ment and savings. Traditionally, these institutions are focused on clients with surplus 
of money, looking for an advice how to invest. For the clients with high surplus, thus 
potentially high profits for the institution, a support is provided in by a human finan-
cial advisor. The advisor is in turn supported by sophisticated software to foresee 
possible future trends on the financial market, and to react in advance for the market 
changes. A typical role of such human advisor is to continuously monitor the financial 
market, detect some important changes and trends, and inform the clients about such 
facts, showing possible consequences on their investments and savings. 
There are several differences between the level and quality of support offered by a 
human financial advisor, and automated financial system. First, human support is 
often initiated by the institution staff, once a change occurs that may be of a potential

Personalized Support for Management of Financial Instruments 23 
interest to the client. Automated support requires manual interaction of the client in 
order to detect the change – one must access the financial information and assess the 
real meaning of detected change, if any. There is a limited notification about changes; 
however, this support is related with a fact of processing a transaction on a user-
owned bank account or a share, with no real assessment of this fact. For example, a 
client is informed about the fact of an ATM transaction last night, and he/she starts to 
remember if there was his/her own operation, or a theft. Second, once notified by a 
human advisor about a change, a client is able to get more information about this 
change, by an interaction with the advisor. For the automated support, no such inter-
action is possible unless it is provided in a pre-defined system functionality. Third, an 
interaction with the human advisor is pers onalized and adjusted to the individual 
expectations, and possibilities of the client. There is limited personalization support 
for the automated financial support system, usually aimed at registering private user’s 
phone number/e-mail address and the preferred way of notifications (SMS, e-mail, a 
voice message, etc.). 
In this paper, we propose a new solution for mass, personalized financial support, 
aimed in applying the technology of software agents. As a technical basis, we propose 
Agent Computing Environment (ACE) [1]. The main idea of our approach is to use 
distributed, mobile, user-defined software agents for continuous monitoring of se-
lected information sources and informing users about detected information changes 
[2]. Once developed, an agent performs autonomously given tasks, pre-programmed 
according to its owner’s needs. The agent ma y adjust its behavior to the environment 
where it is executed at a moment [3], as well  as to some user-independent restrictions 
[4], e.g., communication costs, limitations of end-user hardware, etc. Several agents 
may be logically combined to create a complex agent able to fulfill more sophisticated 
tasks. Complex agents may be settled both statically, as a result of a user request, and 
dynamically, as a result of environmental changes. 
A set of ACE agents plays a role of a human-like personal financial advisor,  
asynchronously providing crucial information about changes related with personally-
owned, different financial instruments, and assessing the real impact of such changes 
to private investments and savings of the agent owner. On one hand, a client is 
equipped with a tool for continuous monitoring of a summary of all his/her finances 
regardless number, types, and access methods of the financial institutions to be ad-
dressed. On the other hand, these institutions  are able to advertis e their offers accord-
ing to the current financial state of the client, to convince this client to use some new 
financial instruments. As these offers are targeted on particular clients, probably  
such advertisement will be effective and not perceived by the clients as yet another 
irritating spam. Moreover, individual treatment of each client makes it possible to 
introduce individual bank offers, adjusted to particular clients, e.g., bank deposits 
with individual provisions. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, a brief introduction to the 
technology of software agents is given, followed by a short description of the Agent 
Computing Environment ACE framework. Based on this description, generic system 
architecture is presented. Following architecture description, some examples are given 
of using ACE agents for personal brokerage and advertisement related with the finan-
cial services. Finally, a short comparison is given of the functionality of the proposed 
framework and the support offered by main Polish e-banks.

24 J. Rykowski 
2   Software Agents Technology 
To solve the problem of mass personalized assistance, we propose to use imperative, 
distributed software agents and the Agent Computing Environment ACE, already 
developed and implemented by us for unrestricted personalization of network data 
sources and systems. In our approach, we define software agents in classical way [5, 
6, 7]. A software agent is a program, executed at a given place, characterized by: (1) 
autonomy – agents process their work independently without the need for human 
management, (2) communication – agents are able to communicate with one another, 
as well as with humans, and (3) learning – agents are able to learn as they react with 
the environment. Agents may be programmed by their owners, thus allowing behavior 
personalization [8]. Agents may be executed in different places, according to owners’ 
needs. We propose to use Agent Computing Environment (ACE) framework as a 
basic agent-based environment. This framework is based on a set of distributed Agent 
Servers, each of them capable of storing and executing software agents. The agents 
may be moved among several Agent Servers. There are “light” Agent Servers with 
limited functionality to be executed in a “thin” hardware/software environment (like 
for example mobile phones, PDAs, etc.), and “thick”, massively used Agent Servers 
located in stationary network hosts. The “t hin” servers are mainly used for executing 
individual agents of device owners, while the latter are used by many users in parallel 
to access certain services, external systems, and public communication channels.  
There are two basic classes of ACE agents: public System Agents, and Private 
Agents. System Agents SAs are created by trusted users (usually system designers), to 
be used in a mass manner by many users. SAs are treated as trustful system elements. 
Their efficiency is of primary concern. Thus, SAs are programmed in Java. A way of 
usage of a given SA cannot be changed by an ordinary user; however, it may be pa-
rameterized during the invocation. SAs are us ed when there is a need for mass access 
by many users to given information, providing this information in a standardized form 
and with optimum effort (from the system point of view). The most frequently used 
SAs are the following: communication wrappers, cache utilities, synchronizers,  
brokers, etc. Private Agents  PAs are created and controlled by their owners. Unless 
directly ordered by its owner, the agent cannot be accessed by any other agent and 
service. For a trade-off between overall system efficiency and user privacy, a special-
ized language is proposed to program agent behavior, based on XML and imperative 
programming, and equipped with several non-standard mechanisms to improve effi-
ciency and security. An agent is controlled by its owner, i.e., the code is defined by 
the owner or by a programmer on behalf of the agent owner, and the internal agent 
variables (agent’s state) are defined and accessible for the owner only. Agent’s behav-
ior, programmed in its code and variables, is determined by the owner and used for 
his/her/its individual purposes. Although theoretically owners have full control over 
the behavior of their agents, in the reality they are not obliged to set up all their agents 
individually. 
3   Overall System Architecture  
In order to efficiently support personalized management of financial resources by the 
use of ACE agents, we propose to develop some specialized system agents SAs – 
gateways to financial institutions included, and some prototypes (patterns, skeletons)

Personalized Support for Management of Financial Instruments 25 
for private agents PAs, to be further personalized by the end-users. The telecommuni-
cation gateways are responsible for assuring communication with the users 
(WAP/WWW, e-mail, SMS/MMS, and voice gateways) and the financial institutions, 
standardization of input/output messages, basic brokerage with the services offered by 
the financial institutions, caching and synchronizing access to these services, etc. 
There are as well some specialized SAs being system-defined utilities, as for example 
chatterbot support with national-language detector [9]. 
There are three basic system layers (Fig. 1) : (1) connections with external software 
systems of financial institutions, and telecommunication channels, (2) system agents, 
including gateways and predefined agents for specific tasks related with interaction 
with the financial institutions, and (3) private, user-defined agents. The presented 
architecture comprises only logical connections among agents and external software 
systems. The agents may be distributed in the network, in particular, some (private) 
agents may be executed in end-user device (a notebook, a stationary host), while some 
agents (both system and private) – in the local area network of a given financial insti-
tution, i.e., an e-bank. Physical connections among distributed agents are realized via 
specialized agent-agent gateways of distributed Agent Servers, with a possibility of 
safety increase by encryption, tunneling, firewalling, etc. 
 
Secured 
financial 
computer 
system 
GAE 
Secured 
communication 
channel 
SAD 
GA2 
SA2 
SA3 Generic gateways 
and drivers 
System 
agents 
External 
systems 
Private 
agents  
Dedicated secured 
gateway 
SA1 
Communication-agent 
Tools 
Personal financial assistant 
Specific gateways 
GA1 
PA2 PA3 
PA1 
Directory- 
agent 
Financial institutions 
Marketing 
agent
GAM 
 
Fig. 1. Layered architecture of ACE-based support for the management of financial resources 
Beside typical gateways for basic communication channels (e-mail, WAP/WWW, 
SMS/MMS, PTT/voice gateway) and standard public utilities such as a calculator-
agent, there are three basic classes of pr edefined agents: (1) communication-agents 
capable of contacting local area networks of financial institutions in a secured way, 
(2) marketing-agents responsible for generating marketing information for the clients 
(i.e., agent owners), and (3) personal financial assistants. Below we describe a strat-
egy of providing and using agents belonging to all these classes. Note that fixing

26 J. Rykowski 
agent classes and thus (somehow) agent functionality does not restrict introducing 
new agents and their classes, in particular monitoring agents, directory-agents, agent-
brokers to/from additional financial services, etc. 
3.1   Communication Agents 
For obvious security reasons, user agents should not access directly services from a 
local area network of a financial institution such as an e-bank. Instead, specialized 
gateways should be provided to act as a firewall/proxy between ACE agents (both 
system and private) and internal resources and applications of the local area network 
of the financial institution. Basic functionality of such gateway(s) is the following: 
─ Multiplexing and synchronizing requests generated asynchronously by the popu-
lation of ACE agents (a proxy for all the traffic to/from financial systems). 
─ Access standardization – providing one single standardized way of accessing all 
the resources related with all the financial institutions involved. To this  
goal, XML should be used as a basic communication and data storage tool. A 
gateway may be specialized for communication with different data sources ac-
cessible by different communication standards and with different data format. 
─ Continuous control over connections to/from the resources of the financial insti-
tution, including billing for using the services/information, storing logs of user 
and system activities, verifying access rights, generating security alerts, etc. 
─ Caching frequently accessed information  – for slowly-changed information (as 
most of the administrative information provided by the financial institutions  
except for brokerage companies) for mass users, an information-cache may  
substantially reduce network traffic to and from massively accessed resources. 
For example, actual interest rate of an account may be distributed efficiently on 
the mass scale.  
─ Generating user- and source-specific alerts  the ACE agents are waiting for. Im-
portant changes in the information provided by bank data sources may be 
quickly reported to the agents. To this goal, user-defined subscriptions may  
be used, to free agents from continuous monitoring and comparison of informa-
tion changes. 
The details about an implementation of a safe connection between communication-
agents and external data sources are usually hidden for the ordinary users. So, the 
communication-agent may be able to filter (inspect) the whole information flow, 
including blocking given users (i.e., their private agents), addresses, specific requests, 
messages containing specific words, etc. 
3.2   Marketing Agent 
The main task of the marketing-agent is related with a distribution of marketing in-
formation (advertisement) based on: (1) a global strategy defined by a local marketing 
staff, (2) some global values obtained from the services and servers belonging to the 
financial institutions involved, and (3) detailed state of private user financial re-
sources, including not only current financial balance, but also individual history of 
transactions. The agent may be invoked by the communication-agent (as mentioned

Personalized Support for Management of Financial Instruments 27 
above), by human staff (to manually set the above-mentioned global strategy), and by 
user private agents, to generate at-the-moment targeted advertisement. Global strategy 
of generating marketing information is usually controlled by a specialized application, 
in turn prepared and controlled by the human staff of the financial institution. The 
application makes it possible to manage mark eting templates. Each template relates a 
parameterized text of an advertisement with some activation conditions. In general, 
once any change is detected in a financial resource of a given user, a set of templates 
is examined towards accordance with the current and past balance of this financial 
resource. For each template found, an adve rtisement message is generated according 
to the marketing pattern and current state of the user financial resource(s). It is up to 
the user to accept a delivery of the message, via private agents, to one of the end-user 
devices (e.g., a mobile phone).  
To facilitate management of all the templates, a dedicated application is provided 
being a GUI interface to the marketing-templates agent. Both the marketing agent and 
the above-mentioned application for managing marketing templates are not fixed and 
may be adjusted to current needs of the bank. To preserve simplicity of the descrip-
tion of our system, we provide here a quite simple example of such agent/application. 
However, this simplified functionality of the marketing agent, in particular the algo-
rithm for alert generation and propagation, may be extended. 
A typical marketing template consists of a condition under which the template is 
activated, related with account name/number, account balance, etc., change-detection 
period and repetition period – when to activate the same template for the same user 
for the next time, a priority – a level of importance for the alert eventually generated 
by the template (priorities may be used by personal agents to filter/classify marketing 
alerts according to individual user  preferences), and parameterized marketing mes-
sage, being any string of characters; parts of  the message marked with “%” character 
are replaced at run-time (i.e., at the moment  of the alert generation) by real values 
related with user’s accounts. For example, the above template: 
Don’t you know what to do with your debit $%s on ‘%n’ account 
for last %m days? Ask for a credit line! 
will be used to eventually generate the following SMS alert: 
Don’t you know what to do with your debit $412 on ‘a-vista’ 
account for last 5 days? Ask for a credit line! 
As it may be seen, the above marketing information is so personalized that this  
information is not perceived as yet-another irritating spam. Moreover, the above-
mentioned priorities make it possible to easily adjust number and importance of the 
incoming alerts to individual user preferences and skills. One may expect that this 
form of an advertisement will be more effective than the classical advertisement sent 
to everybody in unique form, with no user-targeted parameterization. This way of 
marketing seems to be promising and profitable, both for the bank, and its clients. 
3.3   Personal Financial Assistants 
Personal agent-assistant is a main entry point for a particular user, synchronizing all 
the incoming and outcoming messages, storing user preferences (with reference  
to preferred communication links, data formats, presentation interfaces, etc.). The

28 J. Rykowski 
assistant is used as a main broker/synchronizer for all the traffic between a user (agent 
owner) and all the other agents working for this user (both system and private agents). 
Usually, the main task if this agent is to collect user request via a certain communica-
tion channel (i.e., from a certain agent-gateway), standardize this request (usually to 
the form of an XML message), choose the most adequate private/system agent to 
serve this request, and finally collect the response to send it back to the user.  
The personal assistant is also used for sending alerts generated by the user-defined 
subscriptions. According to current user pref erences, an alert is formatted and sent via 
a certain communication channel – an SMS/MMS, e-mail, IM or a similar chat-based 
system, a notification waiting in a WWW server, etc. The best (at the moment) com-
munication channel may be chosen automatically, taking into account current position 
of a user (reported by a specialized agent), user’s last login (place and time), and 
independent restrictions (e.g., user’s availability, scheduled meetings, etc.). 
A special interest is taken to assure efficient communication with the use of hard-
ware/software-restricted devices as for example mobile phones. To this goal, a natural-
language interface is provided, aiming in a personalized chatterbot conversation. Such 
simplified natural-language interface may be personalized for given user(s), which 
limits a necessity of learning different, fixed, complicated interfaces for accessing 
different financial institutions. This also greatly improves an effectiveness of commu-
nicating via limited mobile channels, as for example popular SMS messaging, by  
incorporating user-defined abbreviations and vocabularies. Personal assistant is  
responsible for: (1) permanent storage of parameters of bank account(s) and other 
financial resources, including transaction history, (2) permanent storage of alerts and 
advertisements, (3) filtering marketing information, (4) computing some statistical 
information, and (5) registering and computing payments related with access to the 
financial resources, etc. 
3.4   Personalization of Private Agents 
Below, a strategy is proposed of personalization of user agents according to the 
(growing) user level. At the beginning, the system offers a set of predefined agents, 
with a functionality common for all the users. As time goes by, user expectations 
grow, and the system is ready to satisfy the user with new/extended functionality. TO 
this goal, a client provides some personal preferences: mobile and stationary devices 
used, identifiers (e.g., a phone number, IMEI number, PKI signature, IP/DNS address, 
etc.), preferable communication channels, etc. The institution proposes a set of prede-
fined SAs and PAs to be installed for the supplicant in the Agent Servers belonging to 
this institution. This set of agents is capable of serving client’s requests in a prede-
fined way, according to a common strategy. The institution proposes a set of PAs to 
be installed at client-side, to facilitate contacts with this institution in the future. It is 
up to the user to accept this set of agents or not. In the latter case, only the PAs  
executed in the institution network are used. However, once a client accepts PAs 
agents in his/her private hardware/software environment, he/she may profit in faster 
notifications (e.g., SMS messages sent to mobile phones), better adjustment to end-
user devices, more personalized presentation methods, and more functionality related 
with client-side data processing. As the supplicant may provide some information

Personalized Support for Management of Financial Instruments 29 
about own devices and preferable communication channels, the generated client-side 
PAs may be customized, even if the server-side PAs remain standardized. 
The SAs and PAs installed are equipped with a set of predefined variables and sub-
scriptions, to deal with the private financial resources of the client, i.e., e-bank  
accounts. The subscriptions are parameterized by user-dependent information, e.g., 
resource identification and type, predicted incomes and outcomes, etc. The set of ac-
cepted agents is installed and activated each time the change of information is detected 
related with any active subscription. The detected changes are filtered and potentially 
sent to the client (usually, to the personal assistant, and further via given communica-
tion channel directly to the end-user device, e.g., a mobile phone). Once the client is 
not satisfied with a subscription or PA behavior, he/she has some rights to redefine 
both data and code of his/her agents. For advanced users it is possible to fully personal-
ize the behavior of the system, both at server-, and at the client-side. For non-advanced 
users, it is still possible to define preferable communication channel, ways and timings 
of sending alerts, formats and contents of messages generated by the bank agents (e.g., 
small SMS alerting vs. formatted HTML e-mails). Such changes are easily introduced 
by the bank staff (at supplicant’s request) or by the users. In this way, system function-
ality grows as user requirements and expectations grow. 
4   Comparison with Commercial e-Banking Support Systems 
In this section we present a comparison of functionality of our proposal based on 
ACE agents and three Polish e-banks: Bank Zachodni BZ WBK owned by the Allied 
Irish Bank, mBank (the first virtual bank in Poland), and PKO B.P. / Inteligo (the 
biggest Polish bank). The comparison covers asynchronous bank alerts, SMS messag-
ing to/from the bank about current state of bank account, and basic account/fund 
management. Note that we do not take into consideration other e-offers of these 
banks, such as Internet- and phone-banking, as such functionality is not the main goal 
of our agent-based system. 
Clients of Bank Zachodni BZ WBK ar e entitled to use WA P/WWW standard ac-
cess as well as preformatted SMS messages in order to get some information about 
current state of user bank account [10]. While accessing the system, a user is given 
the following information: account balance, last transactions on each account (for past 
3 months), current deposits and investment fund units owned by the client, and cur-
rency-exchange information. By sending an SMS message, the client is given account 
balance, last few transactions, and currency-exchange rates. The format of all the 
accepted messages is fixed and common for all the users, according to the schema: 
<NIK> <PIN> service-code parameters 
where: NIK is a unique client identifier, PIN is personal client’s password, service-
code is a single letter describing a requested service (“S” for account balance, “H” for 
list of transactions, “K” for currency-exchange rates, etc.), and parameters provide 
some additional information, such as detailed account or currency number. For exam-
ple, in order to know current account balance, one has to send “12345678 0000 S” 
message, where 12345678 stands for client identifier, and 0000 for PIN.  
There are several disadvantages of the above presented way of contacting the bank. 
First, the authorization information – both NIK and PIN – are sent via non-secured

30 J. Rykowski 
SMS channel. Second, it is not possible to personalize system usage, neither by  
adjusting a format of a request, not by adding some additional services. The fixed 
format of incoming and outcoming SMS messages makes it difficult to efficiently use 
the system by non-advanced users one hand, and demanding users on the other hand. 
It looks like our proposal, with personalized functionality, information format, com-
munication channels etc. is much more user-friendly and secured. 
The first Polish virtual bank, mBank (a branch of the BRE bank) [11] offers a pos-
sibility to send request via SMS messages. System functionality and accepted mes-
sage formats (<REQUEST># <NIK>#<PIN>#<PARAMETERS>) are quite similar, 
except the SMS messages are much less user-friendly. For example, SMS request 
“3#01234567#999999#00345678#01122009#31122009” stands for asking for a com-
plete list of bank transactions during December 2009. 
The biggest Polish bank, PKO B.P., incorporated Inteligo virtual bank [12] in order 
to provide e-bank functionality. In addition to the above presented functionality, an 
owner of a PKO account is able to receive SMS and e-mail messages pointing out 
changes of the account balance. It is also possible to ask for the nearest ATM ma-
chine, providing (a part of) geographical address. However, it is not possible to filter 
incoming alerts and personalize information format and contents. In particular, one is 
not able to filter out transactions below certain limit – each account change is reported 
that may be quite irritating. Comparing such alerts with our approach, one may note 
that personalized ACE agents are much more flexible and efficient. 
None of the above mentioned e-banks provides any functionality similar with our 
personal bank marketing. Even if PKO B.P./Inteligo includes some marketing infor-
mation at the end of the e-mails with balance alerts, such information is not personal-
ized and concerns global bank activities, such as information about new credit cards, 
new saving methods, etc. In any case such information is addressed to particular bank 
clients, and, as any generic marketing information, is usually treated as an unwanted 
or even irritating spam. Our approach makes it possible to generate marketing  
information as it is an advice coming from a human staff of the bank, thus a level of 
acceptance is probably greater [13]. Moreover, the marketing information is generated 
only to those clients who are interested in obtaining such information [14]. 
5   Conclusions  
To summarize the paper, the advantages of using ACE agents to support personal 
management of financial resources are listed are the following. 
From the client point of view, all the financial resources involved are uniformly 
accessed and managed. Thus, a client is provided with a total overview of all his/her 
financial resources with a single service. 
Personalized asynchronous alerts improve reaction time for unexpected situations, 
e.g., incidental debit, extra income/outco me, etc. System-generated alerts may be 
adjusted to personal preferences of bank clients, thus the alerting is not irritating. 
It is possible to use any modern telecommunication technology in order to get ac-
cess to the information, including for example popular SMS/MMS gateways, e-mails, 
PTT (Push-To-Talk), etc. The choice for the best communication channel is up to the 
particular client and may be automatically adjusted to current situation.

Personalized Support for Management of Financial Instruments 31 
Access to the information may be personalized at several levels, starting from auto-
adjustment to the communication channel and end-user device, and finishing on de-
fining a specific dictionary for the chatterbot, natural-language conversation. 
The system is open and flexible and may be easily extended both from the points 
of view of users (new individualized functionality) and the financial institution (new 
communication channels, new financial services, new accounts/deposits/funds etc.). 
An implementation of the system is not expensive and may be realized with lim-
ited, standard hardware and software. At the same time, individual client’s devices 
(PDAs, mobile phones, portables and notebooks) may be incorporated in order to 
facilitate data transfer and treatment. The system was tested in two Polish e-banks, 
with both real and simulated (i.e., cloned) clients [4]. Although the results of these 
tests were quite promising, the system has not been yet incorporated into practice. 
References 
1. Rykowski, J.: ACE Agents – Mass Personalized Software Assistance. In: P ěchouček, M., 
Petta, P., Varga, L.Z. (eds.) CEEMAS 2005. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3690, pp. 587–591. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
2. Rykowski, J.: Management of information changes by the use of software agents. Cyber-
netics and Systems 37(2-3) (2006) ISSN 0196-9722, 229-260 
3. Rykowski, J., Juszkiewicz, A.: Personalization of Information Delivery by the Use of Agents. 
In: IADIS Int. Conference WWW/Internet 2003, Algarve, Portugal, pp. 1056–1059 (2003) 
4. Rykowski, J.: Personalized Access to Heterogeneous Distributed Information Sources by 
Means of Software Agents, habilitation (post-do ctoral degree) thesis, the Poznan Univer-
sity of Economics Publishing House, Poznan, Poland, 1-266 (2006), ISSN 1642-3119, 
ISBN 978-83-7417-206-6 
5. Franklin, S., Graesser, A.: Is it an Agent, or just a Program? A Taxonomy for Autonomous 
Agents. In: 3 rd International Workshop on Agent Theories, Architectures, and Languages, 
Springer, Heidelberg (1996) 
6. Nwana, H.: Software Agents: an overview. Knowledge Eng. Review 11/3, 205–244 (1996) 
7. Wooldridge, M., Jennings, N.R.: Intelligent agents: theory and practice. Knowledge Engi-
neering Review 10/2, 115–152 (1996) 
8. Rykowski, J.: Who should take care of the personalization? In: Suomi, R., Cabral, R., 
Hampe, J., Felix, H.A., Jarvelainen, J., Koskivaara, E. (eds.) IFIP International Federation 
for Information Processing, Project E-Society: Building Bricks, pp. 176–188. Springer, 
Heidelberg (2006) 
9. Rykowski, J.: Using software agents to personalize natural-language access to Internet ser-
vices in a chatterbot manner. In: 2 nd International Conference Language And Technology 
L&T 2005, Poznan, Poland (2005) 
10. BZWBK24, Introduction to SMS services, http://english.bzwbk.pl/12068 
11. mBank SMS codes, http://www.mbank.pl/en/guide/safety/sms_codes.html 
12. Intelligo – demo site, http://www.inteligo.pl/infosite/demo/index.html 
13. Żurawik, B.: Mobile banking – a new channel to financial services. Marketing World (2002) 
14. Banking Alerts Reference Application: Overview, Microsoft documentation, 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/default.asp?url=/library/en-
us/SASDK_GetStarted/html/alerts_banking_alerts_overview.asp

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 32–41, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
MAS Approach to Business Models Simulations:  
Supply Chain Management Case Study 
Jacek Jakieła, Paweł Litwin, and Marcin Olech 
Rzeszow University of Technology, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Aeronautics, 
Department of Computer Science,  
Powstancow Warszawy Avenue 8, 35-959 Rzeszow, Poland 
{jjakiela,plitwin,molech}@prz.edu.pl 
Abstract. The main aim of the paper is to show that an agent paradigm may be 
considered as a powerful conceptual framework for organization modeling and 
testbed for business simulations. The sections of the paper gradually prove 
these theses. Firstly the agent orientation has been presented as a source of 
natural and very intuitive modeling constructs and complexity management 
tools. Then the classical model of supply chain simulation was altered to its 
agent version. Finally the case study concerning the agent based simulation ex-
periment of supply chain has been elaborated and results of the simulation runs 
carefully analyzed as well as interpreted. 
Keywords: agent-oriented modeling, agent-oriented simulation, business  
modeling, supply chain modeling, extended enterprise simulation. 
1   Introduction 
Rapid development of electronic marketspaces forced companies to search for new 
sources of effectiveness and efficiency, both intra- and inter-organizational. As 
a consequence the complexity of business models has been growing constantly. This 
complexity concerns not only structural characteristics, but also behavioral ones.  
What is more, completely new business structures have emerged. In order to  
respond quickly to changing customer preferences, companies decide on which activi-
ties they can perform best and integrate their value chains with business models of 
their partners. As a result the value net is created where each of its components should 
act in the optimal way, and therefore the whole net is able to maximize efficiency and 
provide the end customer with the high level of value added. 
The key element of such extended enterprises is their supply chain. It determines 
how effective the company can be. The main problem is that even the simplest supply 
chains can behave in an unpredictable way and it is very hard to make accurate deci-
sions. Sometimes demand for single merchandise or level of stock starts to change 
randomly and the behavior of whole supply chain becomes extremely complex. Only 
way to be prepared for risky situations and make informed decisions is to use the simu-
lation model, which becomes the workbench for extended enterprise. In that case simu-
lation model is used in the process of analyzing the characteristics of the real system.

MAS Approach to Business Models Simulations: Supply Chain Management Case Study 33 
The purpose of this paper is to show how an agent paradigm may be used as busi-
ness modeling and simulation approach to describing and analyzing extended enter-
prises. The problem domain taken into consideration has been cut down to supply 
chain management area. In [15] conceptual basis for simulation experiment has been 
described in detail. It presents the model of supply chain for traditional simulations. 
Case study elaborated and analyzed in this paper concerns agent-oriented version of 
the model mentioned above and has been developed and implemented from scratch. 
2   Multi-agent System as a Simulation Workbench 
2.1   Using Agents in Simulations 
Multiagent-based simulation (MABS) can be defined as the modeling and simulating 
real world system or phenomena where the model consists of agents cooperating with 
one another in carrying out tasks and achieving goals. The advent of multi-agent 
based modeling has introduced an important innovation: behavior of complex systems 
with many active entities can be simulated by modeling individual entities and their 
interactions. Importantly, the operation of the system need not be defined a priori as 
set of equations, terms or logical statements, but the whole behavior emerges from 
individual objects behaviors, their interactions and impact of the environment. 
The MABS approach has been becoming more and more popular and its models 
and their advantages have been widely described in [12][16]. Contributions to the 
MABS domain are periodically published among others in Springer’s LNAI series. 
According to AgentLink Roadmap [9] "agent -based simulation is characterized by 
the intersection of three scientific fields, namely, Agent-Based Computing, the Social 
Sciences and Computer Simulation" (Figure 1).   
 
Fig. 1. Map of the agent oriented research areas [3] 
Location of MABS at the intersection of agent-based computing and computer 
simulation can be accepted if we consider the application of MABS in simulation of 
manufacturing systems and business processes. Due to the fact that vast majority of 
cases requires the inclusion of human factor in simulation of real world system or 
phenomena (for example manufacturing systems, supply chain management), it is 
assumed that social science also affects the MABS.

34 J. Jakieła, P. Litwin, and M. Olech 
When using simulation, the experiment creation process is of great significance. The 
case study presented in the next sections has been build according to steps listed below. 
 
1. Identify and formulate a problem that is to be solved with simulation  
experiment. It is important to have the list of questions articulated, which are 
supposed to be answered with the use of simulation runs. 
2. Create the model. Definition of the real system model, which should provide 
a compromise between the detailed mapping of real system (impeding its im-
plementation and validation), and simplification that suppresses the similarity 
between the model and real system, but making model easier to build. 
3. Choose the metrics.  After the problem is formulated it is important to have 
set of indicators to monitor the state of the modeled system and to draw  
conclusions as well as to find hidden rules or laws. 
4. Set the initial values for simulation parameters.  The sample parameter is 
duration of simulation or number of simulation cycles. During every cycle all 
necessary tasks will be done, of course, only if their preconditions are met. 
The example of other parameters may be demand distribution (Normal, Pois-
son or Exponential distribution), parts and products prices or stock levels. 
5. Run the simulation. After model is fully elaborated, and all variables are set 
up, the simulation may start and operate the predefined number of cycles  
during which values of variables are captured and saved.  
6. Calculate the metrics. Metrics enable to better understand modeled object or 
process. Based on this data the simulation analysis is done. 
7. Interpret simulation results. The last phase is related to the careful analysis 
of simulations results and calculated values of variables. It may lead to  
discovering new rules or dependencies that may be used in the real system 
management process. 
8. Validate the model.  It is based on a comparison of real system results and 
results of simulation, carried out with parameters corresponding to the actual 
operation of the system. The model can be considered valid (verified posi-
tive) if it (repetitively) reflects the behavior of real system. 
The complexity of simulation experiment building process as well as semantic gap 
related to simulation model may be significantly reduced when agent orientation is 
used as modeling paradigm. Next section refers to work that explains why agent is 
intuitive modeling metaphor as well as why agent paradigm is especially well suited 
for managing complexity of problem domain.  
2.2   Using Agent as a Modeling Metaphor and Complexity Management Tool 
One of the fundamental assumptions for this paper is that organization modeling 
process is based on multi-agent system metaphor that leads to perceiving and under-
standing of firm in the way typical for multi-agent systems software engineering,  
but also takes under consideration business aspects along with basic organization 
characteristics. 
The use of a metaphor during the process of organizational analysis and under-
standing is of great significance. Morgan says that metaphor is frequently understood 
as a way to make an argument more appealing, however its meaning is much more

MAS Approach to Business Models Simulations: Supply Chain Management Case Study 35 
important. The use of a metaphor is a consequence of a way one thinks and perceives 
which penetrate our understanding of the world that surrounds us [11]. 
The appearance of obvious similarities between multi-agent systems and business 
organizations is particularly visible in the case of extended enterprises which adopted 
such strategies as decentralization of operations and process orientation. These simi-
larities have been carefully analyzed and described in [7]. Author put together and 
compare structural and behavioral characteristics of multi-agent systems, and features 
of modern organizations extracted from key titles which deal with organization design 
and process orientation [4][5][6][13]. What is more, the process of reducing the se-
mantic gap between the problem domain and the model built for business simulation 
purposes has been presented. Thank to this, the whole modeling process may be very 
intuitive and natural.  
Agent paradigm has also more inherent features that can be used in complexity 
management process which is a serious problem in case of contemporary organiza-
tions modeling. Taking under consideration basic characteristics of complex systems 
defined by Herbert Simon [14] as well as analysis related to agent oriented software 
engineering provided by Jennings and Wooldridge [8], it’s possible to easily prove 
advantages of agent approach in the context of complexity management in the organi-
zation modeling process. 
Additional benefits connected with agent oriented approach during computational 
models development have been analyzed in detail in monograph written by Professor 
Cetnarowicz [1]. As it is claimed, agent oriented approach should lead to improvement 
and enrichment such characteristics of computational representation as flexibility, 
reliability, ability to combine functions of various systems flexibly, as well as ability to 
create new properties such as self-organization or self-adaptation.  
Next section shows the application of MABS to Supply Chain Management. 
3   An Example of Agent Oriented Approach to Business 
Simulations – Supply Chain Case Study 
The following sections present short case study, which illustrates how the multi-
agent-based simulation can be used as a support tool in supply chain management 
process. 
3.1   The Concept of Supply Chain Management 
According to McCormack et al. [10] a Supply Chain is the global network used to 
deliver products and services from raw materials to end customers through an engi-
neered flow of information, physical distribution, and cash. 
Common knowledge is that even small fluctuation of one supply chain parameter 
(for example demand) may lead to the unpredictable behavior of the whole supply 
chain system. It is also worth to mention that executing experiments on the real  
system is usually impossible. These are the reasons why simulation approach has been 
adopted. The process of building the simulation experiment has been based on multi-
agent approach according to the scenario described in the section 2.1.

36 J. Jakieła, P. Litwin, and M. Olech 
3.2   The Scenario of Simulation Experiment 
The simulation experiment has been elaborated in the steps presented below. Descrip-
tion of each step reveals the design decisions which have been made with regard to 
Supply Chain modeling and simulation processes. 
1. Identify and formulate a problem that is to be solved with simulation  
experiment. The main goal of the multi-agent simulation is to check how the 
bullwhip effect may influence the retailer’s delivery time.  
2. Create the model. The application of multi-agent approach to supply chain struc-
ture based on [15] has led to the following model elements: 
• consumer market agent – this element is responsible for buying and consum-
ing products, 
• retailer agent – its mission is to buy products from manufacturer and to sell 
them to consumers, 
• manufacturer agent – it is obliged to purchase materials from supplier,  
process them to final products and sell final products to retailer, 
• supplier agent – this element produces materials and sells them to  
manufacturer. 
Very important part of the model is the logic of agents’ operation which is usually 
formalized with behavioral rules. The sample behavioral rule of manufacturer agent is 
presented on Figure 2 in the form of activity diagram. In order to show the entire 
business logic on one diagram, the level of abstraction is rather high. In fact every 
activity has been split into smaller ones, and therefore the complexity of implementa-
tion realized in NetLogo 4.04 environment is slightly higher. 
During runtime agents communicate using the following flows : 
• goods flow – in the direction from the supplier through manufacturer and  
retailer to consumers, 
• orders (information) flow – from consumers through retailer and manufac-
turer to supplier. 
• money flow – shows how the money circulates in supply chain. 
As a rule the modeling process has several simplifications. They are presented below.  
• time flow when demand occurs and order is placed is skipped, 
• minimal order lot is skipped, 
• minimal production size is skipped, 
• some inner operations are skipped e.g.: production task planning, capacity 
requirements planning, demand planning and forecasting and so on. 
The conceptual model of the supply chain is depicted on the figure 3. 
3. Choose the metrics. The equation (1) describes total delivery time measured 
from the moment when the retailer has ordered products up to the moment when 
products have arrived to retailer.

MAS Approach to Business Models Simulations: Supply Chain Management Case Study 37 
 
Fig. 2. Manufacturer conceptual model 
PCDCPDT TTTTT +++=  (1) 
where: 
TT – total delivery time, T D – delivery time between manufacturer and retailer,  
TP– production time at manufacturer’s floor (it’s skipped if manufacturer has prod-
ucts’ stock greater than the order lot), T DC – delivery time between supplier and 
manufacturer (included only if manufacturer product’s stock is smaller than order lot, 
what is more, supplier has enough part’s stock to meet manufacturer’s order), T PC – 
part’s production time at supplier (included only if supplier part’s stock is not suffi-
cient to meet manufacturer’s order) 
The algorithm realizing this function is implemented in main part of the simulation 
process. Metrics’ values are calculated automatically at a runtime. 
4. Set the initial values for simulation parameters. Because the goal of the simu-
lation experiment is to compare, how the bullwhip effect may influence total  
delivery time of retailer, minimum two simulation runs have to be executed. The 
first run is without inclusion of the bullwhip effect. Second run takes into consid-
eration the bullwhip effect. The case study contains two simulation experiments 
and two runs in each of them. Initial conditions of simulation runs are in table 1. 
5. Run the simulation.  The simulation has been run four times, with parameters 
values as presented in table 1. The results have been saved in text files and used 
in the process of metrics calculations. 
6. Calculate the metrics. The calculated metrics have been presented in table 2. 
Deliveries have been split into three categories A, B and C. The logic of each 
category is explained as follows. Category A denotes direct delivery between 
manufacturer and retailer (products). Category B delivery consists of three 
phases: 1. delivery between supplier and manufacturer (parts), 2. production at

38 J. Jakieła, P. Litwin, and M. Olech 
manufacturer’s plant (parts Æ products), 3. delivery between manufacturer and 
retailer (products). Delivery of category C has four phases: 1. production at  
supplier’s (parts), 2. Delivery between supplier and manufacturer (parts), 3. pro-
duction at manufacturer’s (parts Æ products) 4. delivery between manufacturer 
and retailer (products). 
7. Interpret simulation results.  The interpretation of simulation results has been 
divided into two sections, each related to specific experiment. 
Table 1. Initial conditions for simulation experiments 
Parameters values 
First experiment Second experiment Parameters First 
run 
Second 
Run 
First  
run 
Second  
run 
duration of simulation 300 300 500 500 
part’s price 2.50 2.50 2.00 2.00 
demand distribution normal Normal Poisson Poisson 
mean of distribution 6.0 6.0 5 5 
standard deviation of distribution 1.5 1.5 N/A N/A 
safety part’s stock at supplier 25 25 25 25 
safety part’s stock at manufacturer 20 20 20 20 
“bullwhip effect” simulation NO YES NO YES 
time when bullwhip effect occurs N/A 250 N/A 450 
strength of bullwhip effect N/A 20 N/A 20 
Table 2. The simulation metrics 
Average time of delivery [h] 
First experiment Second experiment Type of delivery First 
run 
Second 
Run Summary First 
run 
Second 
run Summary 
Total 6.94 6.99 +0.05 
(+0.72%) 6.80 6.80 0 
(0%) 
A 4.00 4.18 +0.18 
(+4.50%) 4.07 4.04 -0.03 
(-0.74%) 
B 9.11 8.86 -0.25 
(-2.74%) 9.32 9.28 -0.04 
(-0.43%) 
C 12.82 13.29 +0.47 
(+3.67%) 14.81 14.44 -0.37 
(-2.50%) 
The 
longest delivery 25.8 36 +10.20 
(+39.53%) 25.9 38.2 +12.3 
(+47.49%) 
The 
shortest delivery 2.5 2.6 +0.10 
(+4%) 2.5 2.5 0 
(0%) 
 
 
Experiment No. 1.  Average time of delivery was 6.94 h when bullwhip effect was 
not simulated and 6.99 h in the second case. Difference equals 0.72 %, so it is very 
small change. Average time of direct deliveries has changed from 4.00 h to 4.18 so

MAS Approach to Business Models Simulations: Supply Chain Management Case Study 39 
difference is 4.50%. It is clear that bullwh ip effect caused longer direct deliveries 
time, because of temporary lack of goods needed to fulfill the higher demand. The 
time of deliveries in category B was shorter in second run (about 2.74%) than in first 
one. It was mainly caused by different values of demand, which was randomly gener-
ated according to chosen demand distribution. As it can be seen the C type deliveries 
have been affected the most by bullwhip effect. The difference in delivery time was 
more than 3.67%. Bullwhip effect is clearly shown in the longest delivery time. In the 
first run, we had 25.8 h, in second run we had 36 h. Difference equals 39.53% and it 
could be the serious problem in real circumstances. 
 
Fig. 3. The supply chain structure 
Experiment No. 2. In the second experiment, second run was a little bit better than 
first one. This illogical difference is caused by random values of demand (see experi-
ment no. 1. time of delivery in B category). Of course the negative bullwhip effect in 
the longest delivery time value may be seen: in this case difference equals 47.49%. 
As research shows, there is no doubt that the bullwhip effect causes longer delivery 
time. The more frequently the bullwhip effect occurs the bigger impact it causes. In 
the implemented simulation, the bullwhip effect has been simulated only once, so its 
effect is not fully proved. In order to see it more clearly, the change from randomized 
demand to constant pattern demand should be considered. This change can be applied 
only during comparison of both simulation runs (with and without bullwhip effect 
simulation). Because bullwhip effect occurred only once in every experiment (which 
was quite long), we can suppose that in the shorter simulations impact of bullwhip 
effect will be more serious and harmful (in terms of delivery time). To prove this 
claim, suggested number of simulation cycles is 20 – 50. 
Of course, there are several other interesting questions to ask in this context such 
as: how bullwhip effect influences production stability or money resources; however 
this short case study was elaborated to show  how an agent orientation can be used as 
a paradigm for business simulations and does not pretend to be the full analysis of the 
bullwhip effect problems. 
The simulations of supply chain are often based on traditional approach which has 
been carefully described in [15]. The model presented in this paper is an agent based 
scenario for SCM simulation which provides, among others, the following benefits:

40 J. Jakieła, P. Litwin, and M. Olech 
• The problem space of supply chain (or whole extended enterprise if needed) 
may be effectively divided with an agent modeling concept. 
• Because each model element component is autonomous and proactive, it’s 
quite easy to model decentralization wh ich is inherent characteristic of  
extended enterprises. 
• The model is easily scalable – one can add additional agents playing particu-
lar roles when needed, or new instances of existing agents 
• The business goals can be seamlessly encapsulated in the simulation model 
elements – goal orientation is the basic characteristic of an agent paradigm 
• The supply chain could be very intuitively modeled as a society of cooperat-
ing and goal oriented agents carrying out the business processes’ tasks which 
enable to achieve the goals of the whole extended enterprise. 
4   Conclusions 
There is no exaggeration to say that the growing complexity of contemporary busi-
ness models requires tools for understanding and management of firms’ sophisticated 
structures and processes. The goal of the paper was to show the features of an agent 
orientation from the perspective of business modeling and simulation of extended 
enterprises. The case study presented how an agent-oriented mindset may be used in 
the scenario of creating and running simulation experiment related to supply chain 
management domain. It is also worth to mention that analysis described in the case 
study should not be regarded as a fully ela borated solution of the real problem but as 
an informative example of MAS application to the area of business simulations.  
Taking into consideration that characteristic s of decentralized and process oriented 
organizations are semantically very close to properties of multi-agent systems, using 
agent oriented conceptualization seems to be natural and intuitive modeling metaphor. 
References 
1. Cetnarowicz, K.: Problemy projektowania i realizacji systemów wielo-agentowych.  
Uczelniane wydawnictwa naukowo-dydaktyczne, AGH, Krakow (1999) 
2. Davidsson, P.: Multi agent based simulation: beyond social simulation. In: Moss, S., 
Davidsson, P. (eds.) MABS 2000. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 1979, pp. 97–107. Springer,  
Heidelberg (2001) 
3. Davidsson, P.: Agent based social simulation: a computer science view. J. Artif. Soc. So-
cial Simulation 5 (2002) 
4. Drucker, P.F.: Zarządzanie w XXI wieku. Muza S.A (2000) 
5. Hammer, M., Champy, J.: Reengineering w przedsi ębiorstwie. Neumann Management In-
stitute, Warszawa (1996) 
6. Hammer, M.: Reinzynieria i jej następstwa. PWN, Warszawa (1999) 
7. Jakieła, J.: AROMA – Agentowo zoRientowana metOdologia Modelowania orgAnizacji. 
WAEiI, Politechnika Slaska, Gliwice (2006) 
8. Jennings, N.R., Wooldridge, M.: Agent-oriented software engineering. In: Garijo, F.J., 
Boman, M. (eds.) Proceedings of the 9th European Workshop on Modeling Autonomous 
Agents in a Multi-Agent World: Multi-Agent Sy stem Engineering, vol. 1647, pp. 1–7. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2000)

MAS Approach to Business Models Simulations: Supply Chain Management Case Study 41 
9. Luck, M., McBurney, P., Preist, C.: Agent technology: enabling next generation comput-
ing. A roadmap for agent based computing (2003), http://www.agentlink.org 
10. McCormack, K., Johnson, W.C.: Supply chain networks and business process orientation. 
In: Advanced Strategies and Best Practices. CRC Press LLC, Florida (2003) 
11. Morgan, G.: Images of organizations. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks (2006) 
12. North, M.J., Macal, C.M.: Managing Business Complexity. In: Discovering Strategic Solu-
tions with Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2007) 
13. Peppard, J., Rowland, P.: Reengineering, Gebethner i S-ka, Warszawa (1997) 
14. Simon, H.: The Sciences of Artificial. MIT Press, Cambridge (1996) 
15. Vieira, G.E., Cesar, Jr., O.: A conceptual model for the creation of supply chains models. 
In: Proceedings of the 37th conference on Winter simulation, Orlando, Florida,  
pp. 2619–2627 (2005) 
16. Weyns, D., Uhrmacher, A.M. (eds.): Multi- Agent Systems Simulation and Applications. 
Computational Analysis, Synthesis, and Desi gn of Dynamic Models Series. CRC Press, 
Florida (2009)

Analysing Bidder Performance in Randomised
and Fixed-Deadline Automated Auctions
Kumaara Velan andE rol Gelenbe
Intelligent Systems and Networks Group
Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department
Imperial College
London SW7 2BT, UK
{kumaara.velan,e.gelenbe}@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract. The rule with which automated computerised auctions are
closed play an important role in determining bidder strategies and auc-
tion outcomes. In this paper we examine two such rules: auctions with
randomised closing times and ﬁxed deadlines. To this end, stochastic
models of auctions with discrete state-space representing the prices at-
tained are developed and analysed. The models allow us to determine
the stationary probabilistic outcomes of the auctions, which are used
to examine the bidder performance, measured as the savings it makes
with respect to the maximum payable or its payoﬀ. For this purpose, one
bidder is singled out as the “special bidder” (SB) and its performance is
studied as a function of the speed with which it raises the price, or its bid
rate. The results show that with random closures, the SB has incentives
to place bids promptly to obtain high savings; on the other hand, with
ﬁxed deadline auctions, the SB should choose its bid rate with respect
to the other system parameters in order to maximise payoﬀs.
Keywords: Analytical Models, Stochastic Processes, Automated
Auctions.
1 Introduction
Automated entities engaging in computerised auctions on behalf ofh u m an coun-
terparts ofb uyers ands ellers haver evolutionised tradinga c tivities over theInter-
net.T he absence ofg eographical restrictions in participation, precise execution
ofp r e d e ﬁned rules, fairness of outcomes, and the added advantage ofc omputing
power in monitoring information sources closely whilep e r formingd e m anding
calculationsh avem a d ea u tomated auctions successful mechanisms.T he rules
forc losing such auctionsh aves igniﬁcant inﬂuences on the bidder strategies and
the closingp rices [1,2,3]. Fixed deadlines or “hard closes” ensure auctionse nd
in a predetermined time, andt h e r e fore neither participatingp a r ty will be held
up unpredictably. In contrast,“ soft closes” allow forc onditional extensions in
the auction duration depending on certain criteriab eingf ulﬁlled such as the
incomingb ids.Y et another importantd e sign feature isr andomc losingt imes;
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 42–51, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Randomised and Fixed-Deadline Auctions 43
it is currently beingu s e din auctioningﬁ nancial securities, the London Stock
Exchange [4] beingac a s ein point.
Recently, [5] has examined probabilisticm odels ofa u tomated auctions with
focus on as ingleb idder’sp e r formance, andh a sd e rived closed form solutions
fort h es t a tionary probabilities of interest,i ncludingt h e winningp robability,
waitingt ime tow i n ,andt h es avings made on the purchase.I n[ 6 ] the model
has been simpliﬁed usinga n approximation that yields tractablee xpressionsf or
the measures of interest, at the cost of accuracy. In thisp a p e r,w ec ontinue the
ongoing work, anda nalyse bidder performance in auctions with randomc losing
times against bidder performance in auctions with ﬁxed deadlines.T he objective
ist o show how stochasticm odellingt oolst h a ta r ecommonly used in queueing
systems may be used in developingm a t h e m a tical models of repeated automated
auctions, ande m ployed to evaluate performance and determineb idder strategies.
To thise nd,o neb idder is tagged as the “special bidder”( S B ) ,andt h ea u c tion
outcomes are evaluated as a function of the speed with which itr aises the price.
Section 2p r e s ents a m odelw ith randomc losures where groups ofb idders
participate; members within ag roup are statistically identicali n behaviour, pa-
rameterised by the speed at which they raise the bids.T he auction duration, in
thiss e t ting,i sr andom, andt h emodeli sag e neralisation oft h a ts t u died in [5,6].
Subsequently in Section 3 am odel forﬁ xed lengths ofa u c tion times ise xam-
ined.N umerical examples are presented in discussingt h emodel’sr e s ults.T he
paper isc oncluded with summary, comments, and suggestionsf or future work
in Section 4.
2 Random Closing Times
Wec onsider ascendinga u c tions with discrete unitp rice bid increments.S uppose
ap ool ofb idders engage in an auction where each bidder raises the price by au nit
at a particular speed called the bidr a t e.T he auction may proceed in this regard
until the maximum valuation fort h egood v is reached andt h ebiddings tops.
However, at any nonzero price, the auction may clos ea f t e ram e moryless random
period described with the parameterδ.T hist imeout is refreshed everytime a bid
isp laced before the expiry. Asalec oncludes the auction when the timeout expires
without interruption fromb ids.A fter a random rest period with parameter r,
the process restarts a nd repeats inﬁnitely. All the randomp e riods are dra wn
frome xponential distributions with respective parameters.
2.1 The Mathematical Model
Formally, suppose k groups ofb idders participate, andt h ei–th group consists of
ni bidders, each of whomr aises the price at rate βi, for i =1 , ... ,k .T he system
theni sm odelled as a continuous-time Markov process{Xt : t≥ 0} [9] with state
space
Xt∈ Y ={0,B (i, l),A (i, l):1 ≤ l≤ v, 1≤ i≤ k}, (1)

44 K. Velan and E. Gelenbe
which has the size of2 vk+1. The process will be in state B(i, l)w hen the highest
bid ish eldb y any singleb idder fromt h ei–th group at the price l, and it will be
in state A(i, l)w hen the auction concludes with a salet o ab idder fromt h ei–th
group at the price l.T he long-run stationary probabilities fora ny state x∈ Y
isd e ﬁned as
P(x)= l im
t→∞
P{ Xt = x}. (2)
Then the stationary probabilities will satisfy the followings ystem equations:
P(B(i, 1))
[k∑
j=1,j⁄=i
njβj +( ni− 1)βi + δ
]
= P(0)niβi,i =1 , ... ,k, (3)
P(B(i, l))
[k∑
j=1,j⁄=i
njβj +( ni− 1)βi + δ
]
=
k∑
j=1,j⁄=i
P(B(j, l− 1))niβi + P(B(i, l− 1))(ni− 1)βi,
2≤ l≤ v− 1,i =1 , ... ,k, (4)
P(B(i, v))δ =
k∑
j=1,j⁄=i
P(B(j, v− 1))niβi + P(B(i, v− 1))(ni− 1)βi,
i =1 , ... ,k, (5)
P(A(i, l))r = δP (B(i, l)), 1≤ l≤ v, i =1 , ... ,k, (6)
P(0)
k∑
i=1
niβi = r
k∑
i=1
v∑
l=1
P(A(i, l)), (7)
P(0) +
k∑
i=1
v∑
l=1
(P(A(i, l)) +P(B(i, l))) = 1. (8)
Notice that in thism odel, the grouping ofb idders does not in any wayi mply
collectives elﬁsh behaviour amongg roup members–ag roup member will always
raise the oﬀer price ifh e is not winning, eveni f one ofh is own group mem-
bers holds the highest oﬀer.T he grouping iss imply ac onvenientm a t h e m a tical
abstraction tov iew collectively as e tofb idders who share identical statistical
properties, such as biddingr a t e sin thisc a s e.
With some algebra,w e obtain the stationary probability for state 0
P(0) = rδ
rδ +( r + δ)(∑k
i=1 niβi)
. (9)

Randomised and Fixed-Deadline Auctions 45
In general, there is no straightforward closed form expressionsf ort h es t a tion-
ary probabilities P(A(i, l)) and P(B(i, l)) . Nevertheless, the numericalv alues
can be eﬃc iently computed fora ny arbitrary setting of parameters.W ec an
make two observations regard ingh ow the pr obabilities re late to each other:
P(A(i, l)) can be computed solely with P(B(i, l)); P(B(i, l)) does notd e p end
on any P(B(j, m)) fora ll m≥ l and m<l − 1. Therefore, the solutionsc an be
computed sequentially in the following order:F irst ﬁnd P(0); then, in sequential
order fore a c hl =1 , ... ,v , solve P(B(i, l)) fora ll i; ﬁnally,solvef ora ll P(A(i, l)).
2.2 Performance Measures
The performance measures pertainingt o each bidder belongingt o any group can
be deﬁned ande valuated in as t r aightforward fashion. The average duration of
an auction cycle is
τ = P(0)−1
∑k
i=1 niβi
= rδ +( r + δ)(∑k
i=1 niβi)
rδ∑k
i=1 niβi
. (10)
The probability that a particular singleb idder in group i wins is
π(i)=
∑l=v
l=1 P(A(i, l))
ni
∑i=k
i=1
∑l=v
l=1 P(A(i, l))
. (11)
The expected savings a bidder in group i generates with respect to the maxi-
mum that it is willingt o pay can be expressed as
φ(i)= 1
ni
l=v∑
l=1
(v− l)P(A(i, l)). (12)
Thism e a s u r eisu nconditional, “one-shot” performance metric:i tg ives the sav-
ings the SB can expect in as inglea u c tion cycle.A lthough the measures can be
eﬃciently computed for numericalv alues usinga ny arbitrary setting of parame-
ters,i ngeneral, there is no closed form expressionsf ort h es t a tionary probabilities
P(A(i, l)) and P(B(i, l)).
Now, suppose, as a special case, that there areonly two groups ofb idders such
that k = 2.T he ﬁrst group follows n1 =1 and β1 = β,o r in words,i tc onsists
ofas ingleb idder who bids at rate β.W e will refer to thise ntity as the “special
bidder”( S B ) .The secondg roup has the pr operties n2 = n and β2 = λ,o r in
words,i tc onsists of n bidders each biddinga tr a t eλ.I n thiss p e cialization, the
general model reduces to that discussed in the paper [5], andt h er e s ults obtained
there follows.
Of course, the model allowsf ors olvinga ny number ofg roups with any num-
ber ofm e m b e r sin each.I n the following numerical example, three groups are
considered with n1 = n2 = n3 =1 , that is, three individuals with independent
biddingr a t e sp a r ticipate in the auction. The ﬁrst bidder is tagged as theSB, and
in aﬁ xed β2 and β3 setting, the quantity φ(1) is traced for varying β1 in Fig-
ure 1. The results show that φ increases with β, andd oes so rapidly forh igher

46 K. Velan and E. Gelenbe
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
β1
φ(1)
δ=0.25
δ=0.5
δ=0.75
δ=1
Fig. 1. Expected savings with respect to the maximum payable, or the expected payoﬀ,
for the SB (bidder 1) against various seller ratesδ. The parameters β2 =1 .0, β3 =1 .5,
v = 100, r =1 .
valuations of δ.H ence, the SB has strong incentives to place its bids quickly, i.e.
with high bidr a t e,w hen the knowledge oft h ea u c tion closingt imes is notm a d e
public.I n addition, ift h es eller has a tendency to make sales quickly the SB will
also gain by raising its bidr a t e.
3 Fixed Deadline Auctions
Usinga variation oft h et e c hnique employed in the preceeding, this section con-
siders an auction modelw here the deadline is predetermined, and is made pub-
licly known by the seller.S uppose there are n +1 participatingb idders,o ne of
whom is the tagged SB. Each oft h eother bidders raise the price at rate λ,w hile
the SB raises the price at rate β.T he process can be modelled as a continuous-
time Markov chain X(t), with state space {0,O (1), ... ,O (v),R (1), ... ,R (v)}.
The state U(l) represents the highest oﬀer made at price l by the SB if U = R,
orb yo ne oft h eother bidders if U = O.A lso, the states correspondingt o the
highest valuations reached, O(v) and R(v), are absorbing.D eﬁne Pi,j(s + t) as
the probability that the process is in state j at time s + t fors ome t> 0, given
that wek now that it is in state i at time s:
Pi,j(s + t)=P rob
{
X(s + t)= j| X(s)= i
}
. (13)
Since the auct ion always starts at state 0, when the seller isr e a dy to receive
oﬀers,w em a r kt hisb y setting X(0) = 0. I f wea llow the auction to close at
some ﬁxed time D, then the problem of interest ist oo btain the probability
distribution of the process’ states at time D.

Randomised and Fixed-Deadline Auctions 47
Using Chapman-Kolmogorov’sf orward equation, wec an derive the probability
that the process is in state j at time t given that its t a r t sin state 0 at time 0.
Thus, fort h es t a t ewhen the price attained is 1, which was placed byo ne oft h e
other bidders,w eh ave
d
dtP0,O(1)(t)= nλP0,0(t)− ((n− 1)λ + β)P0,O(1)(t), (14)
where
P0,0(t)=P rob
{
No event occurs in time t at state 0
}
= e−(nλ+β)t. (15)
The last iss t r aightforward: as the only eventt h a tc ano ccur at state 0i sa n
incomingb id, andt hisb idm ay come froma ny oft h ebidders,w eh avet h etotal
rate nλ + β.B y substituting,w eh ave
d
dtP0,O(1)(t)+( (n− 1)λ + β)P0,O(1)(t)= nλe−(nλ+β)t. (16)
Owingt o the process starting at state 0, wek now that there is no positive
probability for itt o reach state O(1) in a zero time period; hence P0,O(1)(0) = 0.
Usingt his initial condition, ands olving the ﬁrstorder diﬀerential linear equation
aboveg ives
P0,O(1)(t)= ne−((n−1)λ+β)t− ne−(nλ+β)t. (17)
Asas implec h e c k,w ec an use the Chapman-Kolmogorov’sb a c kward equation
that captures the same physical process:
d
dtP0,O(1)(t)= nλPO(1),O(1)(t)− (nλ + β)P0,O(1)(t), (18)
where PO(1),O(1)(t) equalst h es u rvivor ofa n exponential at rate (n− 1)λ + β,
the rate at which the process leaves state O(1), evaluated at t,o r PO(1),O(1)(t)=
e−((n−1)λ+β)t.U singt h es a m einitial condition, it is notd iﬃcultt o arrivea t
t h es a m esolution (17). Fort h er e s toft hisa nalysis,w e will use the f orward
equations.
Repeating the procedure fort h es t a t eR(1), weg e t
d
dtP0,R(1)(t)= βP0,0(t)− nλP0,R(1)(t)
= βe−(nλ+β)t− nλP0,R(1)(t), (19)
ands olving it with the initial condition P0,R(1)(0) = 0, we obtain
P0,R(1)(t)= e−nλt(1− eβt). (20)
Following the same style ofa r g u m ent,w ec anw rite the diﬀerential equationsf or
the state O(2):
d
dtP0,O(2)(t)=( n− 1)λP0,O(1)(t)+ nλP0,R(1)(t)
− ((n− 1)λ + β)P0,O(2)(t), (21)

48 K. Velan and E. Gelenbe
which leads to the solution
P0,O(2)(t)=
[ne−λt
λ +( n− 1)t + e(β−λ)t
β− λ − 1
β− λ− n
λ
]
nλe−((n−1)λ+β)t. (22)
Forc ompleteness,w e write the probabilities fort h esystem to be in state R(2)
after time t
d
dtP0,R(2)(t)= βP0,O(1)(t)− nλP0,R(2)(t),
P0,R(2)(t)=
[eβt
β + e−(β−λ)t
β− λ − 1
β− 1
β− λ
]
nβe−nλt. (23)
It is now easy too bserve the pattern: the solutionsf or the subsequent states
require the solutionsf ort h eimmediately preceding states,o rdered in the val-
uation of the price attained.W ith that,w ec anw rite the ge neral form oft h e
equations:
d
dtP0,O(l)(t)=( n− 1)λP0,O(l−1)(t)+ nλP0,R(l−1)(t)
− ((n− 1)λ + β)P0,O(l)(t), 2≤ l<v , (24)
d
dtP0,R(l)(t)= βP0,O(l−1)(t)− nλP0,R(l)(t), 2≤ l<v , (25)
d
dtP0,O(v)(t)=( n− 1)λP0,O(v−1)(t)+ nλP0,R(v−1)(t), (26)
d
dtP0,R(v)(t)= βP0,O(v−1)(t). (27)
Since the process always starts at state 0, in the following,w ec an dropt h e
subscript from the representations without losing information, so that PU(l)(t)≡
P0,U(l)(t)w here U = O,R .I n total, there are 2 v diﬀerential equationst o be
solved, andt h esolution grows increasingly lengthy andu nwieldy for larger l.W e
will note xplore such large systems, but as a proof ofc oncept, present numerical
examples foras ystem ofs ize v =5 .
3.1 Performance Measures
Clearly, when the seller closes the auction at time D, the probability distribution
of the process beingf ound in any oft h es t a t e sgives the outcome oft h ea u c tion.
Fromt h elawo ft otal probabilities,w eh ave
P0(D)+
v∑
l=1
(PR(l)(D)+ PO(l)(D)) = 1. (28)

Randomised and Fixed-Deadline Auctions 49
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
x 10
−3
Bid rate, β
 
 
D=1.05
D=1.1
D=1.2
D=1
Fig. 2. Expected payoﬀ against bid rate β, for the SB, in auctions with diﬀerent ﬁxed
deadline lengths D.H e r en = 10, v =5 ,a n dλ =1 .
Hence the SB’se xpected payoﬀ is
φ =
v∑
l=1
(v− l)PR(l)(D), (29)
in which the normalisingd enominator is omitted due to( 28).
In this section, wea llow the possibilityo fc losingt h ea u c tion without a sale,
so P0(D)i sa s validac oncluding state asPR(l)(D)o r PO(l)(D). In practice, there
is indeed a nonzero probability that an auction does not receivea ny bids after
any length of duration, although thisp robability decreases with the length.S i nce
the closingt ime is the pr incipal decidingf e a t u r eoft hism odel, it ist h e r e fore
reasonablea nd natural to endt h ea u c tion irrespective oft h enumber of received
bids.I n contrast, the previous model considers the auction to haves t a r t e donly
after receiving the ﬁrst bid, so that the auction alwaysc loses with a sale which
couldb ea tam inimum of 1 unitp rice.A gain, because the closingt ime is not
our primary concern there and wed on ot impose a hard deadline,i t isas u itable
approach.
Some numerical results oft h eq u antity φ are plotted against the bidr a t eβ,
for various auction closingt imes D in Figure 2. Generally, auctionst h a ta r e
open for longer per iods, denoted byl arger D,y ields m aller payoﬀs.A ss u c h
auctionst endt o attract more bids, the average sellingp rice tendt o be higher,
andt h e r e fore the ga in on the part oft h e winningb idders,i ncludingt h e SB,
tendt o be smaller.A similar argumenta p plies fort h ec a s eof varying number
ofa u c tion participants: everythinge lse beingt h es a m e, more bidders generate

50 K. Velan and E. Gelenbe
more oﬀers within ag iven period oft ime, hence increase the fetchingp rice for
the good.
Disregardinga ll parameters that are be yondt h eSB’s inﬂuence such as the
closingt imes andt h enumber ofp a r ticipants, the SB cany et optimise its bid
rate in order to maximise its payoﬀ. Operatinga tas lower rate than this optimal
behaviour will result in the auction closingb e fore the SB has had a signiﬁcant
opportunityo fp lacingp otentially successful bids.A lthough this impact iss u b-
stantialo n the part oft h eSB, with possibly zero payoﬀ in the extreme case, the
auction income itself will nots uﬀer as longa st h e r ea r eother participants to
keep itg oing.T he SB’sc omplete withdrawal fromt h ea u c tion, represented with
β = 0, will adversely aﬀect the seller’s income, but the extent oft his inﬂuence
is determined by the number oft h er e m ainingb idders.I n auctions with a large
number of other bidders, the SB’sa b s ence will havem inimali mpact.
On the other hand,i ft h eSB raises the price at a rate faster than the optimal,
itm ay perhaps secure better chances of winning, but thisc omes at the cost of
payingah igher price fort h egood. Consequently, the expected payoﬀ decreases.
The optimal biddingr a t eb alances the trade-oﬀ between securingar e a sonable
chance of winninga ndd rivingag ood bargain. It isa lsow orth notingt h a tt his
optimal rate decreases with D (see Figure 2), or in other words,i n an auction
that is open fora longp e riodt h e SB shouldb ida tas lower rate tha ni n an
auction that is open foras h ort period.
4 Conclusions
Weh avee xamined two probabilisticb iddingm odels in thisp a p e r,o ne in auctions
that close randomly andt h e other in auctionst h a tclose at a predeterm ined
deadline,w ith the emphasis on the SB’s (SpecialB idder) performance in each.
The expected savings generated by the SB with respect to the maximum payable,
or the payoﬀ, has been studied for isolated singlea u c tion cycles, assuming other
system parameters are invariant. Results show that with randomc losures, the
SB has incentives to place its bids promptly too btain high payoﬀs. On the
other hand,w ith ﬁxed deadlines auctions, the SB shouldc hoose its bidr a t ewith
respect to the other system parameters in order to maximise payoﬀs.
In addition, the ra ndomc losure modeli sag e neralisation of the pre vious
works [5,6] that allowsf ors t u dyingc h allengings c enarios involvingm any types
ofb idders with independent parameters , beyondt h e initial two groups.T he
drawback ist h ea b s ence ofc losed form solutions, unlike the pre vious, so the
stationary probabilities havet o be computed sequentially and numerically.
The biggest challenge in the ﬁxed deadlinem odeli st h eg rowth in the number
andt h ecomplexityo ft h ediﬀerential equationst o be solved for large valuations,
but it isb yn o means impossible.A lso, the model makes ani mplicit assumption
ofh omogeneous biddingp rocess that simpliﬁes the analysis.S tudying inhomoge-
neous processes that admitt ime dependencies in the rates that prices are raised
will be interestinga ndr ewarding, as well as mathematically demanding.

Randomised and Fixed-Deadline Auctions 51
Acknowledgements. This research was undertaken as part oft h eALADDIN
(Autonomous Learning Agents for Decentralised Data a nd Information Net-
works) project and is jointly funded by a BAE Systems andE PSRC (Engineering
and Physical Research Council) strategicp a r tnership (EP/C548051/1).
References
1. Roth, A., Ockenfels, A.: Last-Minute Bidding and the Rules for Ending Second-
Price Auctions: Evidence from eBay and Amazon Auctions on the Internet. Amer.
Econ. Rev. 92(4), 1093–1103 (2002)
2. Ariely, D., Ockenfels, A., Roth, A.: An experimental analysis of ending rules in
Internet auctions. RAND Journal of Economics 36(4), 890–907 (2005)
3. Ockenfels, A., Roth, A.E.: Late and multiple bidding in second price Internet auc-
tions: Theory and evidence concerning diﬀerent rules for ending an auction. Games
Econ. Behav. 55(2), 297–320 (2006)
4. LSE: London Stock Exchange: Market Enhancements, http://www.
londonstockexchange.com/information-providers/technical-library/
technical-guidance-notes/technicalguidancenotesarchive/release.pdf
(accessed on January 28, 2010)
5. Velan, K.: Modelling Bidders in Sequential Automated Auctions. The Computer
Journal 53(2), 208–218 (2010)
6. Gelenbe, E., Velan, K.: An Approximate Model for Bidders in Sequential Auto-
mated Auctions. In: H˚akansson, A., Nguyen, N.T., Hartung, R.L., Howlett, R.J.,
Jain, L.C. (eds.) KES-AMSTA 2009. LNCS(LNAI), vol. 5559, pp. 70–79. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009)
7. Gelenbe, E.: Analysis of Automated Auctions. In: Levi, A., Sava¸s, E., Yenig¨un, H.,
Balcısoy, S., Saygın, Y. (eds.) ISCIS 2006. LNCS, vol. 4263, pp. 1–12. Springer,
Heidelberg (2006)
8. Gelenbe, E.: Analysis of Single and Networked Auctions. ACM Trans. Internet
Technol. 9(2), 1–24 (2009)
9. Medhi, J.: Stochastic Processes, 2nd edn. Wiley Eastern Ltd., Chichester (1994)
10. Gelenbe, E., Gy¨orﬁ, L.: Performance of Auctions and Sealed Bids. In: Bradley, J.T.
(ed.) EPEW 2009. LNCS, vol. 5652, pp. 30–43. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)
11. Onur, I., Tomak, K.: Impact of ending rules in online auctions: The case of Ya-
hoo.com. Decision Support Systems 42(3), 1835–1842 (2006)
12. Rothkopf, M.H., Harstad, R.M.: Modeling Competitive Bidding: A Critical Essay.
Manage. Sci. 40(3), 364–384 (1994)
13. Rothkopf, M.H.: Decision Analysis: The Right Tool for Auctions. Decision Analy-
sis 4(3), 167–172 (2007)

cljRobust - Clojure Programming API
for Lego Mindstorms NXT
Konrad Ku/suppresslakowski
Institute of Automatics,
AGH University of Science and Technology
Al. Mickiewicza 30,
30-059 Cracow, Poland
konrad.kulakowski@agh.edu.pl
Abstract. This paper presents thecljRobust - middleware library, which
allows an intelligent control application to be written for Lego Mind-
storms NXT . cljRobust is based on Clojure, which is a modern, con-
current dialect of the Lisp language. It shortens the distance between
deliberative, symbolic processing and hardware. In this way, cljRobust
facilitates the writing of control algorithms which operate close to the
hardware layer, and thus are able to quickly respond to changes in the
environment. Since Lego robots have been adopted by many leading aca-
demic centers all over the world as a standard tool for teaching robotics,
the author hopes the cljRobust library may also be found as an interest-
ing teaching aid in AI robotics.
1 Introduction
One oft h eimportantﬁ elds of research in AI is the building of intelligent, au-
tonomous robots.I tr e q uires knowledge ofm any diﬀerentd isciplines, such as
control theory, mechanics, computer science, artiﬁciali ntelligence and others
depending on the robots’ purposes.F ormerly, such kind ofc onstructions were
available only fora limited number ofs cientists in severall eading research cen-
ters. Over time,i ntelligentr obots haveb e come more andm ore popular.T hese
dayst h ey are availablef or non-experts in the form of out-of-the-box, ready-to-
use robotics e t sp rovided byi ndependentm anufacturers.A goode xample ofs u c h
robotics solutions is Lego Mindstorms NXT - ad idactict ool recognized by many
colleges andu niversities all over the world [5,27]. Although Mindstorms NXT
has a lot off ans, they havet o dealw ith several majord r awbacks oft h eNXT
platform,w here the two most importanta r e:l imited hardware resources oft h e
platform and ineﬃcientb luetooth based communication NXT-PC.I n response
to these problems the Robust library has been proposed [21]. This addresses
the issues by movingC PU intensivep rocessingt o a PCp latform andp roviding
ar obust ande ﬃ cientc ommunication.
Thisa r ticlep r e s ents the cljRobust - the proposition of Clojure contribution li-
brary, which facilitates the programming of Lego Mindstorms NXT with Clojure
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 52–61, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

cljRobust - Clojure Programming API for Lego Mindstorms NXT 53
- a new, eﬃcient Lisp dialect running on a Java Virtual Machine [16]. The com-
bination of Lisp’se xpressiveness with Java’sc oncurrency and its large standard
library provides a powerful tool to the Mindstorms’ programmers,w hich allows
them toi mplementc omplex, intelligent, CPU intensivec ontrol algorithms.L isp’s
roots of Clojure facilitates a symbolick nowledge processing. cljRobust isap a r tof
a larger project conducted by the authora imed at providingp ortablea nd ﬂexible
intelligentc ontrol system architecture fora u tonomous mobiler obots [22].
The introductory section of the paper containsas h ort outline of AI Robotics
includingr e m a r k sconcerning Lisp usage in AI robotp rogramming.T here isa lso
as hort note about the Clojure language.I nS ection 2t h eexistingp rogramming
approaches for NXT are brieﬂy summarized,i ncluding usage oft h eRobust li-
brary. Section 3 contains the proposalo fa Clojure-based API for Mindstorms
NXT.S ection 4p r e s ents a s implec ontrol algorithm writteni n Clojure, and,
ﬁnally, section 5 includes a summary andt h eplan for future research.
1.1 AI Robotics
Asa n example of one oft h ee a rly works in the ﬁeld of AI Robotics,w em ay con-
sider HILARE - am obiler obotc onstructed in LAAS (Laboratoire d’Architecture
et d’Analyse des Systmes) [15] and SHAKEY the robotc onstructed by Nilsson
[26] at Stanford Research Institute. Over the years these pioneer intelligentc on-
trol systems evolved into three major paradigms of AI robotics [3,25]:
– Reactive/Behaviour Based Approach
– HierarchicalP lanninga nd Approach
– Hybrid Approach
One oft h emost well-known advocates of the ﬁrst approach isR .B rooks [7]. Ac-
cordingt o the principle ”The world is its own best model” [8] reactive/behaviour
based control systems focus on data sensinga ndb e h aviour generation rather
than elaborativea ndt ime consumingk nowledge analysis.T hisk ind ofs ystems
isu s e f ul forr a pidly changinga ndu nstructured environments,w here there is no
time forc omplex knowledge processing.
Another approach was adopted byJ .S .A lbus and A.M. Meystel[ 2]. In the
work ”A Reference Model Architecture of Intelligent Control”they proposed a hi-
erarchical control system intensively usingt h eknowledge base and worldm odel.
In theirs ystem, every componenth a sits own computationaln odes,w hich are
organized into hierarchicall ayers. Everyl ayer has its own, well deﬁned area of
responsibility ands p e ciﬁc timing.
An attempt to reconcile oft h etwo previous approaches ist h ehybrid paradigm.
Itt ries to take beneﬁts fromb oth hierarchical planninga ndt h er e a c tivec ontrol
paradigm.A sar e s ult, the hybrids ystem sometimes behaves in a reactivem an-
ner, anda t other times performs careful knowledge-based hierarchical planning.
AuRA [4]o r PRS [14] may servea se xamples oft hisc lass ofs olution.
There are ma ny languages that are used f orp rogrammingr obots. One of
them is Lisp.P robably the ﬁrst reference showing usage of Lisp-based language

54 K. Ku/suppresslakowski
in robotp rogrammingc omes from Hewitt [17]. Later on, Lisp was used in many
AI robotics projects such as Saphira [20,25] (CL-SAPHIRA isa Common Lisp
API fort h e Saphira system), Humanoid Programming System [30,23] or Au-
tonomous Control System - Remote Agent [29]. Lisp isa lso present on Lego
Mindstorms NXT [1]. The currently available implementation isc alled XSLisp
[32] anda llowss implec ontrol applicationst o be written for Lego robots.U n -
fortunately, its support form ulti-threading is limited (e.g. the user is nota ble
tol aunch its own ’custom’ thread). Since it is implemented entirely on L ego
hardware,i ts uﬀers froms t andard platform limitation, such as lack ofm e mory
andC PU power [21,19].
1.2 Clojure
Clojure [9] isam odern dialect oft h eLisp programming language.I t isag e neral-
purpose, functionall anguage strongly supportingc oncurrentp rogramming.I t
runs on a Java Virtual Machine .A dditionally, the CLR (Common Language
Runtime) version of Clojure is currently beingd eveloped.T he ﬁrst version of
the stable language libraryw as released1 in 2007b y Rich Hickey - the inventor
of Clojure.A lthough, Clojure isc alled“Lisp reloaded”[16], which meanst h a tit is
similar to Lisp in many places,i t is notc onstrained by the historyo f Lisp.F irst
ofa ll, besides the possibilityo fu singa Java concurrent library, ith a sits own,
native support forc oncurrency ands ynchronization. It includes a software trans-
actional memory subsystem, atomic references andu p d a t e sviaa synchronously
acting agents.T he immutable, persistent data structures a lso support concur-
rency.Clojure ist ightly connected with a Java platform.I t isp ossiblet o compile
the Clojure program into Java bytecode, call Java objects andm e t hods from
Clojure code, andr eversely call Clojure functionsf rom Java. Clojure syntaxi s
very similar to the Lisp language, although wherever it isp ossible,i t iss impli-
ﬁed.F or instance, Clojure avoids unnecessary parenthesis when the expression
without them iss till understandable [16]. All the syntax changes aims toi m-
prove visual readabilityo ft h elanguage andf a cilitate interoperabilityw ith the
Java platform.T o start writinga nd debuggingp rograms in Clojure almost any
Java developmente nvironmentm ay be used.F or instance, there is a support for
Clojure programming in such developmente nvironments as Eclipse [10] , Net-
Beans [12]o rE m a c s.T he growing number ofa r ticles mentioning Clojure show
that, although it isa veryy oung language,i t has begu n to be noticed by the
international scientiﬁc andp rofessional society.
2 Programming Mindstorms NXT with Robust
The currently available version of Lego Mindstorms NXT was released in 2006
as a continuation oft h ewidely recognized line of Lego educational toys Mind-
storms RCX [1]. This isas e t of Lego blocks, simples ensors, servomechanisms
1 The most recent version of Clojure was released on 31 December 2009.

cljRobust - Clojure Programming API for Lego Mindstorms NXT 55
andac ontrol unit (intelligent brick) powered by anA RM based processor.I ta l-
lows the user to builda wide range ofr oboticm odels, froms t anding ones, such as
ar obotica r m, to elevators or vehicles.A lthough Lego Mindstorms NXT iss old
together with the NationalI nstruments LabVIEW VisualP rogramming Lan-
guage, there are many third party ﬁrmwares providingt h ea bility to program the
Mindstorms NXT in languages such asAda, C, C++, C#, Perl, Python, Visual
Basic, Fort, Fortran, ObjectiveC, Java or Lisp.I ta llowsp rogrammers tow rite
control applicationsf or Mindstorms NXT in almost any language theyw ant.
One oft h emost mature ﬁrmwares is LeJOS - LEgo Java Operating System [6].
LeJOS implements a substantial subset of Java SE, includingm ulti-threading,
garbage collecting, standard data types andc ollections.I ta lso supports wireless
communication (viab luetooth) betweenL ego hardware anda ny other Bluetooth
capablea p pliance.I n particular,i ta llowst h ewholec ontrol application to be
split into two parts:o ner unning on NXT andt h eother running on a PC.T his
possibilityi sa lso used by the Robust control library.
The Robust library[ 21] ist h ea u t hor’s attempt to provide his students with
ap rogramminge nvironmentf or Mindstorms NXT, which wouldb es uitablef or
CPU intensivec ontrol applications.T he libraryi sc omposed oft wo modules,
RobustNXT and RobustPC.T he ﬁrst oner unsd irectly on ani ntelligentb rick,
such as the LeJOS application, whilst the sec ond one isar e a dy-to-use Java
library compatible with a standard Java Virtual Machine (ﬁg.1 ) .B oth parts of
Robust communicate with each other viaab luetooth link.
RobustPC provides the pr ogrammers with se veral synchronous a nda s yn-
chronous interfaces.T hey provide access to all the vital Lego Mindstorms com-
ponents, such as motors, touch sensors,l ight sensors, ultrasonics ensors ands ome
third party appliances e.g. the vision subsystem NXTCam-v2. One oft h eb eneﬁts
oft h eRobust libraryi s the support fora synchronous communication between
Fig. 1. Solution architecture

56 K. Ku/suppresslakowski
the Lego hardware andt h ePC.T hanks to thiss olution the data are se nt via
bluetooth only wheni t isa c t u ally needed.A complete description oft h eRobust
library can be found in [21].
3 cljRobust API
The cljRobust libraryi sd e signed as a Clojure API providingaf u nctionali nter-
face to the Robust library. The fully functional control system using cljRobust is
composed oft h efour layers (ﬁg.1 ) :
– RobustNXT - LeJOS based low level module oft h eRobust library,
– RobustPC -P Cb a s e dmodule of Robust runningu nder the control of Java
Standard Edition,
– cljRobust - functional, Clojure based API to the Robust library,
– Deliberative Control Layer - custom, deliberativec ontrol application.
Like the Robust library the cljRobust API provides access to almost all the
importantf e a t u r e soft h eLego hardware.I ta lso containsf unctionst h a tenable
library administration e.g.l ogs e t ting, safe closure oft h elibrary etc.A goode x-
ample oft h ecljRobust interface are the functionsr e s ponsiblef orm ovingar obot.
Move API (listing:1 ) allows the pr ogrammer to submitt h er obot vehicle’s
subsequentr oute primitives,w hich are: movingf orward (line:1 ), smooth turning
ofa left orr ight curve (line: 7)o rt u rning “in place”- aroundt h evehicle’sa xis
(line: 11)
Listing 1. cljRobust Move Synchronous API (excerpt)
Submittings everal primitives at the same t ime meanst h a tall the submitted
commands are queued andp rocessed oneb yo ne.T hanks to pre-submittingt h e

cljRobust - Clojure Programming API for Lego Mindstorms NXT 57
moves, the Robust libraryi sa blet o compose diﬀerentm ovec ommands intoo ne
smooth longm ove,w ithout annoyingp a u s e sb e tween diﬀerentp rimitives [21].
Besides the synchronous Move API,c l j R o b u s talso provides the asynchronous
Move API (listing: 2), which enables the programmer to track subsequentr obot
movements.F unction rb-move-async-handler (line:1 7) allows the appropriate
handler,w hich receives information about subsequentm oves, to be registered.
Listing 2. cljRobust Movement Asynchronous API
Another example of cljRobust ist h etouch sense support.T here are functions
providings ynchronous anda synchronous access to the touch sensor.T he syn-
chronous interface (listing:3 ) allows the current state ofat ouch sensort o be
read (line: 25)
Listing 3. cljRobust Touch API
The asynchronous interface provides the fu nction (line: 29)forr e gisteringt h e
appropriate touch handler.T he Robust library can control NXT robots,w hich

58 K. Ku/suppresslakowski
haved iﬀerenth a r dware setups.T hus,i t isp ossiblet h a ta tagiven moments ome
speciﬁc part of API is not supported.F ort hisr e a son interface functionsa r e
grouped by theirf unctionalities, ande very group iss u r rounded by the appro-
priate “platform check”. For instance, the touch related functionsa r eg rouped
into two groups: synchronous anda s ynchronous.T hey also havet wo checks
(lines: 24,28),separately fort h esynchronous anda synchronous partsoft h etouch
interface.
There are alsoo ther functions in the cljRobust interface that are not listed
here.T hese are light andu ltrasonics ensors.
4 Sample Algorithm
The cljRobust libraryi sac onveniente xtension oft h e Clojure language that
might be used to control LegoM i ndstorms NXT. A simplee xample ofs u c han
application isp r e s ented below (listing4 ).
Listing 4. Random exploration algorithm with basic collision avoidance
The function explorer (line 37)encloses the ra ndome xploration algorithm.A t
the beginning (lines: 40- 41) it initializes the library( call rb-system-startup
establishes a b luetooth linkb e tween NXT and PC,i n itializes the c ommands
proxy,etc.), ands e t st h ef unction collision-avoidance-handler as a touch asyn-
chronous handler.N ext, the vehicle is ordered to movef orward (line: 42). Then,
inside the loopt h ea lgorithm queues a f orward move (line: 44)w ith random
length varyingb e tween 200 and4 00 millimeters and waits fort h emovec h ange

cljRobust - Clojure Programming API for Lego Mindstorms NXT 59
(line: 45). Ift h e nextm ove isas t oppage the vehicleg oes backward andr an-
domly chooses another direction (lines: 47 - 48), otherwise the nextf orward
move is queued.
Although it isas implee xample, thisa lgorithm showsh ow easy the functional
programmingf or Mindstorms NXT can be.T hanks to the expressiveness of Clo-
jure the algorithm containsa lmost no non-functional code.I t ise a sy tow rite and
debug.B esides ofa ll the advantages that follow usingf unctional approach Clo-
jure helps the programmer to keep appropriate levelo fa b s t r a c tions. Comparing
to the sampler obotics programs writteni n structurall anguages [28,11] Clojure
code seems to be easier to understanda ndd evelop.S i nce the wholes olution is
based on a Java Virtual Machine, it ise a sy to use third party Java libraries.
For instance, the application may use the knowledge writteni n the form ofr ules
managed by Jess Java’s based rulee ngine [13].
5 Summary and Future Work
In thisp a p e rt h eu s eof Clojure forp rogrammingt h eLego Mindstorms NXT
set isp r e s ented.T he appropriate extensionsa r ep rovided by the cljRobust API,
which isa ni nterface to the Robust library[ 21]. Thise xtension enables intelligent
control applicationsu singt h ef unctional programming paradigm to be eas ily
written. Followingt h eClojure-contrib library code, the cljRobust API will be
licensed under the Eclipse Public License andb e come publicly available in the
Internet.T he authorh opes that, along with the growingp opularityo f Clojure,
the cljRobust API will be identiﬁed as ani nterestingt ool forc a r rying out various
robotice xperiments.
The cljRobust API isd e signed as a c ontribution libraryo ft h eClojure lan-
guage.T hism e anst h a titm ay servea sag enerics olution forp rogramming NXT
robots usinga Lisp-based, functional approach.I t isa lso part ofa larger project
aimingt o create a portable, eﬃcient intelligentc ontrol system [22]. In thisu n-
dertaking it is intended as middleware, actingb e tween ah igh-level deliberative
control layer andah a r dware dependentr e al-time control layer.
Although, cljRobust API isr e a dy to use, a lot oft hings st ill need to be
improved.S i nce the curre nt implementation of the hard ware layer isf ocused
mainly on various Mindstorms NXT vehicles, there isap lan to also add other
hardware robotics bases. One oft h econsidered hardware platforms ist h erobot
Hexor II [18]. A virtual hardware running on several diﬀerentr obotics imulators,
such asWebots [31] or Microsoft Robotics Studio[24] are also considered.B ecause
ofa ll the planned extensions, the cljRobust interface will gradually evolvet o
cover all the required functionalities.F urther development ofa Clojure based
deliberativec ontrol layer will alsoi n ﬂuence the cljRobust API.T he ultimate
goali st o provide a portablea nde ﬃ cient intelligentc ontrol system integrating
diﬀerentk inds ofk nowledge,w hich wouldb ea b let o cooperate with diﬀerent
hardware and virtual roboticp latforms.
Acknowledgements. This research is supported byA GHU n i versityo f Science
and Technology, contract no. 11.11.120.859.

60 K. Ku/suppresslakowski
References
1. Lego Mindstorms User Guide. The Lego Group (2006)
2. Albus, J.S.: RCS: A Reference Model Architecture for Intelligent Control. IEEE
Computer 25(5), 56–59 (1992)
3. Arkin, R.C.: Intelligent Control of Robot Mobility, ch. 16. Wiley, Chichester (2007)
4. Arkin, R.C., Balch, T.: Cooperative multiagent robotic systems (September 1998)
5. Atmatzidou, S., et al.: The use of LEGO Mindstorms in elementary and secondary
education: game as a way of triggering learning. In: Workshop proceedings of Inter-
national Conference on Simulation, Modeling, and Programming for Autonomous
Robots (SIMPAR) (2008)
6. Bagnall, B.: Maximum LEGO NXT: Building Robots with Java Brains. Variant
Press (2009)
7. Brooks, R.A.: A robust layered control system for a mobile robot. IEEE J. Robot.
and Auto. 2(3), 14–23 (1986)
8. Brooks, R.A.: Intelligence without Representation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 47,
139–159 (1991)
9. Clojure language home page, http://clojure.org/
10. Counterclockwise, Eclipse plugin helping developers write Clojure code,
http://code.google.com/p/counterclockwise/
11. Crawford, R.: Programming Lego Robots using NBC (2007),
http://bricxcc.sourceforge.net
12. Enclojure, an environment for the Clojure programming language,
http://www.enclojure.org/
13. Friedman-Hill, E.: Jess in action: rule-based systems in Java. Manning Publications
(January 2003)
14. Georgeﬀ, M.P., Lansky, A.L.: Reactive Reasoning and Planning. In: Proceedings
of the 6th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (1987)
15. Giralt, G., Sobek, R., Chatila, R.: A multi-level planning and navigation system
for a mobile robot; A ﬁrst approach to HILARE. In: International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 335–337 (1979)
16. Halloway, S.: Programming Clojure. In: Pragmatic Programmers (May 2009)
17. Hewitt, C.: PLANNER: A language for proving theorems in robots. In: The Inter-
national Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Inc. (January 1969)
18. Hexor project home page, http://www.stenzel.com.pl
19. Klassner, F.: A Case Study of LEGO Mindstorms - Suitability for Artiﬁcial In-
telligence and Robotics Courses at the College Level. In: Proceedings of the 33rd
SIGCSE technical symposium on Computer science education (2002)
20. Konolige, K., Myers, K., Ruspini, E., Saﬃotti, A.: The Saphira Architecture: A
Design for Autonomy, July 14 (1997)
21. Ku/suppresslakowski, K.: Robust - Towards the Design of an Eﬀective Control Library for
Lego Mindstorms NXT. In: Proceedings of Conference on Software Engineering
Techniques CEE-SET 2009 (September 2009)
22. Ku/suppresslakowski, K.: Towards Java-based Intelligent Control Architecture. In: Proceed-
ings of International Joint Conference Intelligent Information Systems (June 2009)
23. Matsui, T.: EusLisp for Object-Oriented Robot Programming. Computer Software
- Japan Society For Software Science and Technology Journal (January 2006)
24. Microsoft Robotics Studio, http://msdn.microsoft.com
25. Murphy, R.R.: Introduction to AI Robotics. MIT Press, Cambridge (2000)
26. Nilsson, N.: Shakey the Robot. Tech. Note 323, AI Center, SRI International (1984)

cljRobust - Clojure Programming API for Lego Mindstorms NXT 61
27. Parson, S., Sklar, E.: Teaching AI using LEGO Mindstorms. American Association
for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2004)
28. Presston, S.: The Deﬁnitive Guide to Building Java Robots. APress (2005)
29. Rajan, K., Bernard, D., Dorais, G., Gamble, E.: Remote Agent: An autonomous
control system for the new millennium. In: ECAI 2000: 14th European Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (January 2000)
30. Ueda, R., Ogura, T., Okada, K., Inabab, M.: Design and implementation of hu-
manoid programming system powered by deformable objects simulation. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Systems
(IAS-10) (January 2008)
31. Webots simulation environment, http://www.cyberbotics.com
32. Yuasa, T.: XS: Lisp on Lego MindStorms. In: Proceedings of International Lisp
Conference (2003)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 62–71, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Agent-Enabled Collaborative Downloading:  
Towards Energy-Efficient Provisioning  
of Group-Oriented Services 
Iva Bojic, Vedran Podobnik, and Mario Kusek 
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, Croatia 
{iva.bojic,vedran.podobnik,mario.kusek}@fer.hr 
Abstract. In this article we propose a novel approach, enabled by software 
agents, in mobile service provisioning process: energy-efficient collaborative 
downloading. The main idea is that mobile users, represented with their agents 
and corresponding profiles, interested in the same content download some parts 
directly from a service server and others afterwards locally exchange among 
themselves to reduce overall energy consumption. Collaborative downloading is 
formed as an auction where mobile users’ agents compete to determine which 
parts of a requested content to download directly from the service server and 
which to exchange with other users. Our main motivation for conceiving colla-
borative downloading was to lower the overall energy consumption of users’ 
mobile devices. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed innovation 
can save up to 75% of the energy of mobile devices’ batteries. 
Keywords: user collaboration, software agents, self-organization, ad hoc  
network, mobile service provisioning, energy-efficiency. 
1   Introduction 
The emergence of the New Generation Network (NGN) has enabled provisioning of 
advanced services to mobile users [1] but al so provoked a growth of mobile services’ 
complexity [2]. With a growth of mobile services’ complexity, there is a need for 
larger battery capacities and/or lower energy consumption [3]. This article proposes a 
novel approach, enabled by software agents, in mobile service provisioning: energy-
efficient collaborative downloading. Con cept of collaboration among users while 
downloading is not a novel one. In [4] is proposed SPAWN, a cooperative strategy for 
content delivery and sharing in future vehicular networks. However, the idea behind 
the SPAWN is communication efficient, while our innovation in mobile service  
provisioning is motivated by achieving energy efficiency . VC-MAC mechanisms 
introduced in [5] are for a novel protocol that utilizes the concept of cooperative 
communication tailored for vehicular networks. While VC-MAC leverages the broad-
cast nature of the wireless medium to maximize the system throughput, our approach 
utilizes the same concept to achieve better energy-efficiency by building Bluetooth ad 
hoc network. Bluetooth network extends and complements the General Packet Radio

Agent-Enabled Collaborative Downloading 63 
Service (GPRS) mobile network, but consumes much less energy than GPRS-based 
communication (shown in Tab. 1 [6]). 
 
Table 1. Energy consumption in GPRS and Bluetooth networks [6] 
 Send ( µjoules/bit) Recieve ( µjoules/bit) 
Bluetooth 0.064 0.064 
GPRS 15.647 1.422 
2   System Architecture 
The proposed system architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. Let  ሽ denote 
the set of mobile users that are subscribers of a certain telco and let  ሽ 
denote a set of mobile users in one mobile ad hoc network. Set औ is always a subset of 
set ओ, while गൌ |औ|. On the service server (e.g. telco’s server or 3rd party pro-
vider’s server) content क is divided into smaller parts ሽ. 
 
Fig. 1. System architecture  
2.1   User and Service Profiles  
Each mobile user is presented by user profile while each service is represented with 
service profile . In our system, these profiles are based on the Composite Capabili-
ties/Preferences Profile (CC/PP) and User Agent Profile (UAProf) standards. Semantic 
matchmaking is the process of comparing two objects represented through semantic 
profiles, resulting with a number within a certain interval. In our case, we compare 
doubles user-service and rate their similarity with a number between 0 and 1 (our

64 I. Bojic, V. Podobnik, and M. Kusek 
matchmaking algorithm is presented in [7] and [8]). Such comparison enables the telco 
(i.e. mobile service provider) to enhance the provisioning of group-oriented services. 
2.2   Agent-Enabled User Clustering 
A software agent [9][10][11] is a program which autonomously acts on behalf of its 
principal, while carrying out complex information and communication tasks that have 
been delegated to it. From the owner’s point of view, agents improve her/his efficien-
cy by reducing the time required to execute personal and/or business tasks. A system 
composed of several software agents, coll ectively capable of reaching goals that are 
difficult to achieve by an individual agent or a monolithic system, is called a Multi-
Agent System (MAS) [12].  
Agent communication has to be regulated by a certain set of rules in order to ef-
fectively conduct a conversation. This necessity compelled Foundation for Intelligent 
Physical Agents 1 ( F I P A )  t o  d e v e l o p  Agent Communication Language 2 (ACL). The 
ACL defines universal message format and provides protocols for a great variety of 
possible situations. 
An agent must possess some intelligence grounded on its knowledge base, reason-
ing mechanisms and learning capabilities. The intelligence of an agent is a prerequisite 
for all its other characteristics. Depending on the assignment of a particular agent, there 
are differences in types of information contained in its knowledge base. However, 
generally this information can be divided into two parts – the owner’s profile and the 
agent’s knowledge about its environment. It is very important to notice that the agent's 
knowledge base does not contain static information. Adversely, the agent continuously 
updates its owner’s profile according to its owner’s latest needs. 
The proposed MAS is consisted of six different types of agents:  
• Repository Agent (RA). The RA receives user profiles from Provider Agent 
and stores them into a semantic database. Additionally, the RA implements 
the algorithm for user clustering (i.e. the identification of a set of ग mobile 
users which are physically close to each other and interested in the similar 
service). Although the calculation of set औ from set ओ can be done in various 
ways, for user clustering we are using following steps: 
1. calculating similarities between the service profile and each user pro-
file within the required distance (see [7] and [8]); 
2. ranking users according to semantic similarities in a descending  
order; 
3. possible candidates are determined by setting a similarity threshold 
(i.e. 60% of the highest value); 
4. enquiring possible candidates about their interest in the service; 
5. all the possible candidates who answered affirmative are added to the 
set औ. 
• Provider Agent (PA). The PA manages users’ profiles and communicates with 
the RA and SA.  
                                                           
1 Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents: http://www.fipa.org 
2 ACL specification: http://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00061/XC00061E.html

Agent-Enabled Collaborative Downloading 65 
• Server Agent (SA). The SA sends REQUEST  (for group) message to PA re-
questing for group. After RA makes semantic matchmaking and group forma-
tion, PA sends names of users in group to SA. Each mobile user is represented 
by her/his MA.  
• Mobile Agents (MAs). The MA receives ACL messages from SIP_to_ACL 
Agent, sends them to SA and then forwards them to ACL_to_SIP Agent.  
• ACL_to_SIP Agent (ASA) and SIP_to_ACL Agent (SAA). Since the commu-
nication between server and mobile devices uses Session Initiation Protocol  
(SIP), SAA and ASA convert ACL messages to SIP and SIP to ACL messag-
es, respectively. 
3   Collaborative Downloading: The SOMA 
Mobile users collaborate to reconstruct content क. Collaborative downloading is 
formed as a set of auctions where users compete to determine which parts of content 
क to download directly from the service server and which to exchange with other 
users. In this article we propose Self-Organized Market Algorithm (SOMA) for solv-
ing this problem. Energy-efficient collaborative downloading based on SOMA has 
two phases: market formation and auctions. 
3.1   Phase One: SOMA Market Formation 
Inputs to the first SOMA phase are sets औ and क, while the output is defined as an 
association of every element in set क with one of the users from set औ. It is important 
to note that in this phase of SOMA, every element of set क is associated with only 
one user from set औ: this is the user which has to download the corresponding part of 
the requested content directly from the service server via GPRS and who will act as 
the initial seller of that content part in SOMA’s second phase. This is also the reason 
why this first step of SOMA is called market formation.  
SOMA’s market formation phase begins with each mobile user   ࣵࣼcalculating 
her/his own utility function :ࣵࣼ  
अࣼࣵభ ⋅ࣶࣷࣼࣵ൅ इःः ⋅ ःःࣼࣵ׊, ࣼऔ  (1) 
where ሾ0,100ሿ indicates the battery charge  level and  ሾ0,100ሿ the 
signal strength  level of user  ࣵࣼs mobile device, while  భ  and इःः are non-
negative constants defining the importance of battery charge level and signal strength 
level, respectively. While the  ࣶࣵࣼࣷand ࣵࣼvalues are individual characteristics of 
every particular mobile user ࣵࣼ ,భ  and इःः are predefined by the telco and are 
common to all mobile users औ. 
Afterwards, each mobile user  ௔ collects the values of the utility functions  ࣶࣼ  
(ࣵof all other users. User   ࣵࣼ can then calculate the number of con-
tent parts ೌ which she/he has to download directly from the service server as  
ऀࣼቆच ⋅
अࣼࣵ
∑ अࣶࣼ
ग
ࣶൌ1
׊ࣼ אࣵ ࡶ2)

66 I. Bojic, V. Podobnik, and M. Kusek 
where  
෍ࣿऀࣼܽ
ൌ च
ग
ୀଵ
 (3) 
Formula (3) denotes that sum of parts downloaded on all mobile devices in the 
mobile ad hoc network is equal to entire content. 
3.2   Phase Two: SOMA Auctions 
The input to the SOMA auctions phase is the output from the SOMA market forma-
tion phase, while the output is defined as the system state in which all users from set  
औ possess all the parts of set  क and are therefore able to reconstruct the requested 
content. In this algorithm phase, parts are exchanged between mobile users via Blu-
etooth. Each user that possesses at least one part of the content is a seller in the auc-
tions and bids together with other sellers. Each user missing at least one part of  
the content is a buyer in the auctions and starts auctioning for the parts she/he wants 
to buy. 
Seller bid prices are not explicitly determined by sellers but are implicitly calcu-
lated by buyers. Buyer   ࣵࣼ calculates bid price  pࣶࣷࣽࣼࣵࣼ
 for part  ࣷࣽof seller   ࣶࣼ as  
follows  
pࣶࣼࣵࣼࣷࣽ
ࣶࣷࣼࣷࣽ
ࣷࣸ ࣶࣼࣵࣼࣽ׊,ࣷ ࣽאࣷ क׊ࣼ ,ࣵࣼ ࣶऔ  (4) 
where  ࣶࣷࣽࣼࣷ presents user  ࣶࣼs production costs  for part  ࣷࣽand  ࣶࣷࣽࣼࣵࣼࣷࣸ denotes 
the delivery costs for part  ࣷࣽfrom seller  ࣶࣼ to buyer ࣵࣼ  .
The production cost is calculated by a seller as follows       
ࣶࣷࣼ2 ⋅ ቀ100 െࣶࣶࣷࣼቁ ൅ इࣹ⋅ࣹࣶࣼࣽࣷ
5) 
where ሾ0,100ሿ represents the antipheromone for user  ࣶࣼs part ࣷࣽwhile 
మ  and ࣹare non-negative constants defining the importance of the battery 
charge level and the antipheromone, respectively.  After user ࣶࣼsells partࣷࣽ ,ࣶࣹࣷࣽࣼ  
is set to the highest possible value (i.e. 100). As time passes, the antipheromone value 
decreases: after a while antipheromone is equal to 0 (i.e. the lowest possible value) 
and stays that way until user  ࣶࣼsells part  ࣷࣽ again. The usage of the antipheromone 
creates balance in the market. 
The delivery cost is calculated by buyer as  
ࣶࣷࣸࣼࣵࣼ⋅ࣶࣶࣼࣵࣼ
൅ इऀः ⋅ ቀच െऀ ःࣶࣼࣵࣼ
ቁ (6) 
where  ࣶࣶࣼࣵࣼ represents the number of content parts that user  ࣵࣼhas already bought 
from user   ࣶࣼ and ࣶࣼࣵࣼrepresents the number of content parts that user   ࣵࣼhas al-
ready sold to user  ࣶࣼwhile  ࣶ and इऀः are non-negative constants defining the 
importance of ࣶࣶࣼࣵࣼand ࣶࣼࣵࣼrespectively.

Agent-Enabled Collaborative Downloading 67 
4   Simulation: A Proof-of-Concept Scenario 
Our simulation results compare today’s standard approach to mobile service provi-
sioning (i.e. plain mode ) with collaborative download mode . In plain mode  each  
mobile user communicates only with a service server and downloads the whole de-
sired content autonomously via certain mobile network technology. In collaborative 
download mode mobile users interested in the sa me content collaborate and download 
the desired content together. Content on the service server is divided into several parts 
and each part can be downloaded independently from the service server via certain 
mobile network technology and afterwards exchanged with other mobile users via 
certain ad hoc network technology.  
4.1   SOMA Pre-phase: Group Formation 
Before the SOMA begins, group of users in collaboration must be specified (i.e. 
SOMA pre-phase: group formation , described in section 2.2). Fig. 2 shows agents’ 
communication during the group formation phase. For clarity, we have not included 
ASA and SAA in Fig. 2, but every message sent by mobile user firstly goes through 
SAA who converts SIP message into ACL message and forwards it to corresponding 
MA. Analogously, every message sent to mobile user firstly goes through ASA who 
makes new SIP message from received ACL message. In our proof-of-concept 
scenario there are six mobile users (଺ሽ) that are subscribers of a 
Fig. 2. Group formation

68 I. Bojic, V. Podobnik, and M. Kusek 
telco. Each user first sends SUBSCRIBE message to log-in. Afterwards, the whole 
system is on hold until one of the users requires (i.e. ହ) the certain (group-oriented) 
service. When such request occurs, the belonging MA sends REQUEST (for service) 
message to the SA. Afterwards, the SA sends REQUEST (for group) message to the 
PA who fetches user profiles stored in the semantic repository through REQUEST (for 
users) message sent to RA. After having performed the location filtering and 
clustering, the PA returns International Mobile Equipment Identities (IMEIs) of users 
in the same group as the requesting user ହ, because for them it is most likely that 
they would share user’s ହ interest in requested service. SA sends PROPOSE (for 
service) messages to all members of formed group, except to initiating user ହ (i.e. 
users ସ and ଺). SA is then blocked until it gets all of the answers or timeout 
occurs. It is very important to set a ti meout to prevent a deadlock. Each MA can 
accept the proposition by sending back an ACCEPT_PROPOSAL (for service) 
message, or refuse it by sending REJECT_PROPOSAL (for service) message. All 
messages that SA did not receive before  timeout occurred, are considered as 
REJECT_PROPOSAL (for service) messages. At last, the SA then sends INFORM 
(for group) message to those MAs which confirmed their interest in the movie (i.e. 
ସሽ, where ସ and ହ). Afterwards the 
download can be started with the SOMA phase one (i.e. market formation). 
4.2   Phase One: SOMA Market Formation 
After group formation, in our system there are four mobile users ( गൌ4 ) while the 
content on the server is divided into five parts  (चൌ5 ) where each part is size of 67 
KB. Data in Tab. 2 shows battery charge  ࣶࣵࣼࣷ and signal strength  ࣵࣼ levels of each 
mobile device at moments ऄ଴ and ऄଶ. 
Table 2. The battery charge and signal strength levels at moments ऄ଴ (beginning of the SOMA) 
and ऄଶ (some moment during the SOMA phase two) 
 ࣼଵ ࣼଶ ࣼଷ ࣼସ 
 ऄ଴ ऄଶ ऄ଴ ऄଶ ऄ଴ ऄଶ ऄ଴ ऄଶ 
ࣶࣷࣼࣵ68 58 26 20 65 63 37 34 
ःःࣼࣵ92 92 54 53 55 66 83 88 
 
Each mobile user ௔ calculates the number of parts that she/he must download us-
ing the data in Tab. 2, formula (1) with parameters set to  భ ൌइ ःः ൌ0 . 5 and 
formula (2) 
ऀࣼऀࣼమ ൌࣿऀࣼయ ൌࣿऀࣼర ൌ1  (7) 
Users then download designated parts directly from the service server via GPRS. 
The resulting distribution of parts at the end of the SOMA market formation phase 
(i.e. moment  ऄଵ) is shown in Tab. 3. Mobile user  ࣵࣼsets antipheromone value for 
downloaded parts to the lowest possible va lue. During the second SOMA phase users 
exchange content parts via Bluetooth. Pairs of exchanging users are determined by an 
auction mechanism.

Agent-Enabled Collaborative Downloading 69 
Table 3. Antipheromone values at moments ऄଵ and ऄଶ 
 ࣼଵ ࣼଶ ࣼଷ ࣼସ 
 ऄ଴ ऄଶ ऄ଴ ऄଶ ऄ଴ ऄଶ ऄ଴ ऄଶ 
ଵ 0 100  31    35 
ଶ 0 66  6    22 
ଷ   0 56  51   
ସ  68   0 11   
ହ  12    89 0 74 
4.3   Phase Two: SOMA Auctions 
At some moment  ऄଶ user ଶ starts a new auction for missing parts (i.e. parts  ସ and 
ହሻ and collects sellers’ production costs. Se llers calculate production costs using 
formula (5) with the associated parameters set to  ൌ0 . 5 and the data 
from Tab. 2 and Tab. 3 
ࣷࣼࣷࣼయࣽࣷࣼరࣽఱ ൌ7 0 (8) 
Now user ଶ can calculate sellers’ delivery costs using formula (6) and the data from 
Tab. 4 
ࣷࣸࣼమࣼࣷࣸ ࣼమࣼయࣽࣷࣸ ࣼమࣼరࣽఱ ൌ2  (9) 
Finally, user ଶ can calculate sellers’ bids using formula (4) with data calculated with 
formulas (8) and (9) 
ऀࣼమࣼ݌ࣼమࣼయࣽ݌ࣼమࣼరࣽఱ ൌ7 2 (10) 
Since, the price  ర , according to (10), is the lowest, user  ଶ decides to down-
load part ସ via Bluetooth from userଷ. 
Table 4. The number of bought and sold parts for user ଶ at moment ऄଶ 
 ࣼଵ ࣼଶ ࣼଷ ࣼସ 
ࣶࣼమ 2 0 0 2 
ऀःࣼమ 0 1 1 0 
In our simulation overall energy consumption is calculated as a size of chunk mul-
tiplied by mobile devices’ characteristic energy consumption per bit shown in Tab. 1. 
Chunk is the information unit which includes only data packets in plain mode  and 
both data packets and gossip messages in collaborative download mode . Gossip mes-
sages are used to propagate content availability information through users’ bids in 
SOMA auctions. Despite gossip messages that present message overhead, the pre-
sented collaborative download mode  consumes only 0.48 J, while the same four-
mobile-user scenario in plain mode consumes 1.52 J of mobile users’ energy.

70 I. Bojic, V. Podobnik, and M. Kusek 
 
Fig. 3. Energy consumption: (a) in the system, (b) per mobile user 
Additionally, energy consumption in system of two to six users is shown in  
Fig. 3(a): for six users collaborative download mode  saves 75% of mobile devices’ 
energy. From Fig. 3(b) it is obviously that in plain mode each user downloads whole 
content autonomously using GPRS, no matter how many users are in the system. 
However, in collaborative download mode , whole content is downloaded in ad hoc  
network just once using GPRS (see formula (3)) and for further chunk exchange Blu-
etooth is used. Since, Bluetooth communication spends less energy than GPRS, total 
sum of exchanged chunks divided with amount of users in the system is decreasing 
with greater number of users in the system.

Agent-Enabled Collaborative Downloading 71 
5   Conclusion 
In ad hoc  networks (e.g. Bluetooth-based network), every node acts as a router for 
other nodes. Thus, collaboration at the network level can be resonated at the applica-
tion level. In this article we propose SOMA, an energy-efficient Bluetooth-based algo-
rithm for users’ collaboration in mobile service provisioning. The simulation results 
show a significant decrease of energy consumption of mobile users for collaborative 
download mode in front of plain mode. This is of prime importance since limited ener-
gy supply is one of the greatest challenges faced by both mobile users and telcos.  
Acknowledgements. The authors acknowledge the support of research project  
“Content Delivery and Mobility of Users and Services in New Generation Networks” 
(036-0362027-1639), funded by the Ministry of Science, Education and Sports of the 
Republic of Croatia. 
References 
1. Lee, M., Lee, J., Cho, Y.: How a Convergence Product Affects Related Markets: The Case 
of the Mobile Phone. ETRI Journal 31(2), 215–224 (2009) 
2. Yoon, J.-L.: Telco 2.0: A New Role and Business Model. Communications 45(1), 10–12 
(2007) 
3. Pentikousis, K.: In Serach of Energy-Efficient Mobile Networking. IEEE Communica-
tions 48(1), 95–103 (2010) 
4. Nandan, A., Das, S., Pau, G., Gerla, M.: Co-Operative Downloading in Vehicular Ad Hoc 
Wireless Networks. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Conference on Wireless On-demand 
Network Systems and Services (WONS 2005), St. Moritz (Switzerland), pp. 32–41 (2005) 
5. Zhang, J., Zhang, Q., Jia, W.: A Novel MA C Protocol for Cooperative Downloading in 
Vehicular Networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference 
(GLOBECOM 2007), Washington (USA), pp. 4974–4978 (2007) 
6. O’Hara, K.J., Nathuji, R., Raj, H., Schwan, K., Balch, T.: AutoPower: Toward Energy-
aware Software Systems for Distributed Mobile Robots. In: Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2006), pp. 2757–2762 
(2006) 
7. Vrdoljak, L., Bojic, I., Podobnik, V., Kusek, M.: The AMiGO-Mob: Agent-based Middle-
ware for Group-oriented Mobile Service Provisioning. In: Pro ceedings of the 10th Interna-
tional Conference on Telecommunications (ConTEL 2009), Zagreb (Croatia), pp. 97– 104 
(2009) 
8. Podobnik, V., Petric, A., Trzec, K., Galetic, V., Jezic, G.: Agent-based Provisioning of 
Group-oriented Non-linear Telecommunication Services. In: Nguyen, N.T., Kowalczyk, 
R., Chen, S.-M. (eds.) ICCCI 2009. LNCS, vol. 5796, pp. 198–204. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2009) 
9. Cockayne, W., Zyda, M.: Mobile Agents. Manning Publications, Greenwich (1998) 
10. Bradshaw, J.: Software Agents. MIT Press, Cambridge (1997) 
11. Podobnik, V., Petric, A., Jezic, G.: An Agent-Based Solution for Dynamic Supply Chain 
Management. Journal of Universal Computer Science 14(7), 1080–1104 (2008) 
12. Jennings, N., Sycara, K., Wooldridge, M.: A Roadmap of Agent Research and Develop-
ment. Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 1(1), 7–36 (1998)

Lifespan-Aware Routing
for Wireless Sensor Networks
Adam Czubak and Jakub Wojtanowski
Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science, Opole University
{adam.czubak,jakub.wojtanowski}@math.uni.opole.pl
Abstract. Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) have the capability to be-
come the eyes and ears for the future networked society allowing moni-
toring of any habitat or object’s properties remotely and independently
of an energy source. Services based on this technology may change the
way we monitor and control remote areas and objects.
In this paper we propose a diﬀerent approach to routing data across
Wireless Sensor Networks. We argue that a distance-vector protocol us-
ing a lifespan-aware metric is a plausible solution to the task of routing
information in WSN in a manner that both saves energy of the indi-
vidual node and manages summarized energy of the system equally and
fairly. The concept is designed to handle heterogeneous WSNs with dif-
ferent hardware and battery capacities while retaining a true peer-to-peer
network topology.
1 Introduction
Routing isa ni mportantp roblem in computer networks.I t isr e s ponsiblef or
deliveringd a t af roma ny node toi ts destination. The subject oft hiss t u dyi sa
new routinga lgorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks.
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) isaﬁ nite set of nodes, each onee q uipped
with sensing instruments, am icroprocessor, ar a dio usually with omnidirectional
antennaa nda limited capacity battery. We assume, that in addition to sensor
nodes in the network, there isa lso at least onec entraln ode, called a sink node,
used for gatheringd a t af romt h es ensor nodes.T he sinkm ay be wired, has a
more eﬃcientm icroprocessor, radio andac onstantp ower supply.
Since the network has a n ad-hocb e h aviour andd oesn’th ave a predeﬁ ned
structure its hould be capable ofs elf-organisation. The routingt a s kin WSNs is
to forward data fromt h es ensor nodes to the sink in the most eﬃcientm anner
possible.W ireless Sensor Networks are designed to handle veryl o wdata through-
put (even as low as few bytes a day), exchanging lower throughput andh igher
message latency for longer node batteryl ife,l o wer cost, ands elf-organization (see
[1]). A routingp rotocol shouldt h e r e fore function in an energy-eﬃcientm anner.
Due to potential applications WSNsh ave received signiﬁcant attention in re-
cent years. Ease ofu s eofs u c hs ensinge q uipment,i ts small size and independence
frome xternal power supply make them a perfect candidate forp e r formingt a s k s
such as monitoring intrusions in security systems, detectings eismica c tivities,
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 72–81, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Lifespan-Aware Routing for Wireless Sensor Networks 73
detectingf a ults andp e r formingd iagnosticp rocesses in mechanical devices, mea-
suringm e t h ane or other gas levels in mines andt unnelsa ndm any other real-life
applications.
These are the main issues to address whiled e signingar outings c h e m e:
Maximizing Network Lifetime. Since the battery capacities ofs ensor nodes
are ﬁnite, energy consumption shouldb et a k en under consideration while
makingr outingd e cisions.M i n imizing number of necessary transmissions,
diﬀerentiatingr outes to make the workload as uniform across the network
as possible, using links with lowest energy costs, may all be of interest in
order to eﬃciently exploita vailablee nergy resources.T he goal here ist o
prolongt h etime before ﬁrst node in the network depletes its battery.
Reliability, Safety and Fault Tolerance.In some cases,o n l yoccasional de-
liveryo f a data packet can be more than enough.I no ther cases,v ery high
reliability requirements exist.A t ﬁrst the reliabilityo fp a c k e tt r ansmission
has notb e en regarded as a key feature of WSN but thisp oint of view changed
and nowadays 99.9% ofa ll data ise xpected to arrivea tt h esink nodes.B ut
since nodes may runo ut ofe nergy, may be damaged ors tolen andt h e r e fore
the wireless communication between any two nodes can be interrupted,i t is
important that the WSN as a whole isa blet o tolerate such faults.
Scalability. Since a WSN might include a large number of nodes, the employed
routings c h e m em u s tb ea blet o scale well to these numbers.
Channel Bandwidth. The bandwidth isac ommon resource.T he dataisb eing
senta c ross a common channeli n am ultiple access medium.I n addition to
the se nsingd a t a, there isa lso ano verhead of messages se ntf orr outing
purposes that,i f occurringa tt h es a m etime, may result in ani ncreased
possibilityo fc ollisionsa ndf ollowingp ower-expensiver e t r ansmissions.T he
collision avoidance task isp e r formed byl o wer network layers but limiting
the amount ofr outingd a t as enta nd its frequency thus avoidingu nnecessary
retransmissionsm ay signiﬁcantly lower energy consumption.
Some interestingt e c hniques were proposed toi mprove in the network lifetime:
– standby scheduling i.e. the ability to shut down a node entirely ora lmost
entirely, activating it only wheni t is necessary( see [2]),
– data aggregation andd a t af u sion, tol o wer the amount ofd a t as enta c ross
the network (see [3]),
– intermediate power-attached nodes called mediation devices,w hich might
take on some oft h e workload ofc ommunication, gathering the data se nt
within its communication range (see [4]),
– battery recovery eﬀect consideration, since awell-known fact is that a battery
has the ability to recreate some of its power if it isu s e dmore often fors hort
periods oft ime instead ofas inglee xhaustivep ower drain (see [5]),
– energetics u s t ainability, to harvest energy frome nvironment (see [6]),
– high-level data descriptors, so called meta-data to eliminate the transmission
of duplicate andr e d undantd a t at h roughout the network (see [7])

74 A. Czubak and J. Wojtanowski
Some oft h ea bovem e t hods are either hardware speciﬁc ora p plication depen-
dents olutionsa ndm ost oft h e mc an be integrated into any routingp rotocol
addingt oi ts eﬃciency. Therefore none oft h ea bovea r em entioned in thisp a p e r.
Incorporatinga ny oft hose woulda lso have impact on the overall performance
oft h eWSN andu nnecessarily blur the results.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:I nS ection 2 wep r e s enta vailable
energy-eﬃcientr outings olutions.I nS ection 3 we describe the proposed routing
method.I nS ection 4 wep rovide experimental results.I nS ection 5 wec onclude.
2 Routing Algorithms
Several eﬃcientr outinga lgorithms haveb e en proposed.S tarting with bas ic
Flooding (broadcast-based)w here nodes sendt h eir gathered data in every di-
rection until it reaches the observer.T his approach incurs high overhead but is
immunet o dynamicc h anges in the topologyo ft h enetwork.
In Directed Diﬀusion (see [8]) Routinga lgorithm all data gathered by sensors
is described by attribute-value tuple . Each nodes receives request broadcast by
the sinkc alled interest.I f requested data isa vailablea ts p e ciﬁc node itc r e a t e s
gradientt owards source oft hisr e q u e s tandap a t hisc r e a t e d.
SPIN -A daptive Protocol for Information Dissemination (see [7]) isd e signed
for WSN. Each node presents its data ton eighbours that arein oneh opd istance.
If neighbouring node is interested in thiss p e ciﬁc information it requests the
data.S P I Nuses three types of messages:A D V(advertisingd a t a), REQ (request
ofd a t a) and DATA (gathered readings). This approach proves very eﬃcient if
sensingd a t as ent over the network iss p a r s e.
LEACH -L o w EnergyA daptiveC lustering Hierarchy( see [9]) isp rotocol
based on clustering ofs ensors.W hen cluster is created each ofc onsisting nodes
takes partin election ofac luster-head.T hat elected node gathers all data within
the cluster, aggregates ita ndt r ansmits to the sink.I fc luster-head energyl evel
isd e pleted, another main node ise lected.S o an artiﬁcial hierarchyi sb uiltu pon
the network, making its ensitivet o changes in the network.
Rumor Routing (see [10]) isa lgorithm that usesagents.A n agent is a message
with long TTL that travelst h rough sensor network andc r e a t e sp a t h stowards
the sink. Everyn ode has table of neighbours ande vents.W hen a node wants to
add a speciﬁc path its ends a request usingr andomp a t h.A strategy unsuitable
for veryl arge networks.
BEE (see [5]) - Battery Energy Eﬃcientr outinga lgorithm uses cost function
associated with energy transmission and node’s battery behaviour.I tc hooses a
path that iss elected by minimizingc ost function. This approach minimizes the
cost of the path neglecting the batteryl evels oft h enodes along it.
3 Proposed Algorithm
3.1 Preliminaries
We perceivea ny givenW S Nas a connected undirected graph G =( V,E ). The
elements ofs e t V represents ensor nodes a nd E ⊆ [V ]2 ist h es e tofe d g e s

Lifespan-Aware Routing for Wireless Sensor Networks 75
i.e.i ft wo sensor nodes v1,v2 are capable ofe s t a blishingad irect bidirectional
communication channelw ith each other then{v1,v2}∈ E.
The goali st o relay data over the nodes to the sinka se ﬃ ciently as possible
over paths.A path isas e q u ence of nodes.W e will enumerate paths in graph G
in reverse order,i .e. ap a t hp = vkvk−1 ... v1v0 starts at vk ande nds with v0.
We assume that the Wireless Sensor Network isa n ad-hoc network,i tc onsist
ofas e t ofs ensor nodes V anda number ofs ink nodes S ⊂ V .N o des are
heterogeneous i.e.n odes may diﬀer in energyl evels, energy consumption, wireless
antennar ange.T he idea ist o choose routes froms ensors to the sinks o that
path lifetimes (i.e. the time before a node on that path depletes its battery) are
uniform.T herefore by network lifetime wed enote the time till the ﬁrst sensor
v depletes its battery bv andu s eit later on in Section 4a sas u itablem e a s u r e.
Other aspect worth consideration isr oute diﬀerentiation resulting in au niform
workload distribution between paths.
Wee valuate worthiness ofs ending the data from node vk towards a sink v0
over route paths.
Deﬁnition 1. A route path r in G is a path
r = vkvk−1 ... v1v0 (1)
such that
1. v0∈ S,
2. vi /∈ S for i =1 , ... ,k ,
3.{vi,vi−1}∈ E for i =1 , ... ,k ,
4. vi⁄= vj for all i⁄= j.
A set ofa ll route paths at node v isd enoted by Rv since node v may be aware
ofm ultipler oute paths r ∈ Rv leadingt oward the s ink. Everyn ode chooses
autonomously the one it will use forr elayingd a t a.T he decision which onet o
choose will be based on the metric associated with a route path.
Deﬁnition 2. Am e t r i cmr of a route pathr is a numeric value calculated along
r starting at v0 up to node vk as follows:
mr =
k∑
i=1
1
c(vk,vk−1) (2)
where c(vk,vk−1) is a cost function stating how exhaustive for node vk is trans-
mitting the collected data over to node vk−1
Please note, that this value isd iﬀerentf ore veryn ode v1 ... vk, so for node v1
m = 1
c(v1,v0) for node v2 m = 1
c(v2,v1) + 1
c(v1,v0) for node v3 m =∑3
i=1
1
c(vk,vk−1)
ands o the metric increases as wet r averse the route paths nodes.
At least one r ofa ll route paths Rv availablet on ode v is the preferred one
when the metrica s sociated with it ist h es m allest:
mbest
r := min{mr : r∈ Rv} (3)

76 A. Czubak and J. Wojtanowski
Deﬁnition 3. The route pathrv with the smallest metric is called a proper route
path of a node v
rbest
v = argmin
r∈Rv
{mr} (4)
The node vk will use its neighbour vbest
k−1 fromt h es e q u ence rbest
vk as the best next
hopf orr elayingd a t atowards the sink.
Everyn ode vk keeps track oft h eroutes leadingt oward the sink Rvk .A tﬁ r s t
Rvk =∅. Every time a node discovers anew proper route path its ends a message
to all other nodes w :{{vk,w}∈ E}.N otice, that only onea nd only the best
route ist r ansmitted over ton eighbouring nodes.T he message sentf rom node vk
describing its proper route path containsaq u a d r u ple
prpvk =( vk,w,m vk ,dvk )( 5 )
where
– vk ist h enode where this message originated;
– w is the destination node fort his message, may be unspeciﬁed if addressed
to all neighbours of vk;
– mvk ist h eb e s tm e t ric mbest
r associated with this rbest
vk calculated at node vk;
– dvk ist h edistance across which the node vk believes to haves entt his prp.
An ode may gain knowledge about a new r in one oft h r e eways:i tm ay receive
a prp unexpectedly froma nearbyn ode or itm ay receivea prp as a response
toi ts discovery message.T he information stored in this quadruple,i f certain
conditionsa r em e t, may be used to determinea new rbest
v used forr elayingd a t a.
An interestingp a r toft h er e s e a r c hist h ec onstruction oft h ec ost function
c(vk,vk−1) mentioned in (2). The criteria importantf or WSN are multiple,l ike
the batteryl evel, cumulativea mount ofe nergy used along the path,n ode’s local
economy politics and other mentioned in Section 1. B ut a WSN may consist
of nodes with diﬀerente nergyl evels, diﬀerentt r ansceiver energy consumption
characteristics or heterogeneous hardware.I t ise ven possible that dur ingt h e
network operation, when a WSN has almost depleted its energy resources an
administratort osses a few brand newn odes, thus hopingt o extendt h elifetime
oft h e whole WNS, not just fort h ef ewn ewo nes tow ork.T he solution that
wep ropose ist h e r e fore to take under consideration the number oft r ansmissions
a node vk is capable ofc onductingt on ode vk−1 along rbest
vk before its battery
depletion, as ort of weight associated with an edge{vk,vk−1}∈ E but onet h a t
diﬀers depending on the direction oft h et r ansmission:
c(vk,vk−1)= c(vk,dvk−1 )= bvk
fvk (dvk−1 ) (6)
where
– dvk−1 ist h edistance across whic ht h ed a t am u s tb es ent in order to reach
node vk−1 (it was received in the message prpvk−1 );
– bvk ist h eenergyl evel at node vk;

Lifespan-Aware Routing for Wireless Sensor Networks 77
– fvk (d) returnst h ea mount ofp ower node vk will consume in order to send
data across distance d.
The metricm a k e st h enodes prefer the r outes,w hich will be longer available
not because these are particularly economic regardinge nergy consumption, but
because nodes on these paths are ablet o perform more transmissions.T hisk ind
ofm e t ric is characteristic ofd istance-vectorr outingp rotocolsa s it isb einga c-
cumulated at e veryn ode on the route.T hisb e a r ssimilarities to the routing
protocolsu s e din LAN and WAN networks.T he advantage here isa lso the fact,
that the calculationsa r enaturally distributed amonga ll nodes alongt h eroute
anda r enotc alculation-intensive.
3.2 Algorithm
The node does not need to be aware oft h ewhole network topologyi no rder to
perform the calculationsr e q uired to choose the nexth op node vbest
k−1 from rbest
vk .
Everyn ode performs locally only one last step from (2). In order to calculate
it’s best metric (3) andc hoose the best nexth opf rom (4)i tr e q uires only the
data received in the prp (5). So everyn ode isa ware only ofas m all fracture of
the network (i.e.i ts neighbours) and ofac u m ulativem e t rics mbest
r received from
its neighbours.S o the set Rv consist ofs e q u ences of length 1, because a single
node sees only the last two elements ofar oute path:i tselfa ndt h enexth op.
Thism a k e st h ealgorithm simple, distributed, easy to analyse and inexpensive
to run.
There are three types of messages a node v may receive.
–R D I S C O V E R Ybyw hich a neighbour node asks fora RUPDATE
–R U P D A T E=( vbest
k−1,m best
r ,dvk−1 )w hich corresponds to a prp,
–D A T Aused fors ending the data which a sensorc ollected andr elaying it
toward a sink node.
Ats t a r t u p: mbest
r =0 , vbest
k−1 = null
Fore veryn ode v run the followingc ode until battery depletion:
if ( vbest
k−1==null) SendPacket(∀w{w :{vk,w}∈ E},RDISCOVERY)
if ( vbest
k−1!=null) SendPacket( vbest
k−1,DATA)
if (ReceivePacket(p))
if (p.Type == RDISCOVERY)
if ( vbest
k−1!=null)
if (p.Source == vbest
k−1)
mbest
r =0
vbest
k−1 = null
else
SendPacket(p.Source,RUPDATE)
if (p.Type == UPDATE)
if ( vbest
k−1==null)
vbest
k−1 =p.Source

78 A. Czubak and J. Wojtanowski
mbest
r =p.Metric+1/c(vk,p.Source)
SendPacket(∀w{w :{vk,w}∈ E},RUPDATE)
else
if (p.Source == vbest
k−1)
mbest
r =p.Metric+1/c(vk,p.Source)
SendPacket(∀w{w :{vk,w}∈ E},RUPDATE)
if (p.Metric +1/c(vk,p .Source))≤ mbest
r )
mbest
r =p.Metric+1/c(vk,p .Source)
vbest
k−1 =p.Source
SendPacket(∀w{w :{vk,w}∈ E},RUPDATE)
if (p.Type == DATA)
if ( Rvk ⁄=∅)
if ((p.Destination == vk)) SendPacket( vbest
k−1,DATA)
Sleep(t)
4 Experimental Results
4.1 Experimental Environment
The experiments were conducted with a s imulation application developed in
Visual C#[ see Fig.1 ] .T he application was tailored to suite the purp ose of
simulating Wireless Sensor Networks.I t’sp rimary characteristics are:
– multi-threading, each node has a thread function working independently and
in quasi-parallelw ay from other nodes andt h em e dium, so that the asyn-
chrony ofr e al-life hardware was achieved,
– the nodes andt h em e dium are independentf rome a c hother objects,
– the nodes mayvaryi nevery aspect: transmission range, batteryl evel, battery
consumption economy, calculation andc ommunication delay,
– energy characteristict h a twas chosen forc onductingt h esimulations ist h a t
ofac ontemporary used device, the DN2140 mote1.
4.2 Results
The network topology chosen fort h et e s tisa 11x11 mesh with a sink node in the
center ands ensor nodes surroundingt h ec enter, all nodes havet h es a m et r ans-
mission range,w hich covers 12 neighbouring nodes [see Fig. 2]. Thist opology
was chosen, because with the transmission range that limited, the nodes that
are in the range oft h esinka r et h eonly ones capable ofr elaying messages to
the sink, so these become sooner or later the bottleneck fore very routinga lgo-
rithm used.S o the network’s lifetime mayo n l ybe extended by eﬃciencyo ft h e
algorithm used.
1 DN2140 is a 2.4GHz Mote-on-Chip TMdesigned by Dust NetworksTM.T h i s1 2x1 2
x 1.58mm chip is a compilation of a microprocessor, IEEE 802.15.4-compliant radio
and integrated power ampliﬁer for 10 dBm operation. It is a part of a solution called
SMARTMESH-XDTMhttp://www.dustnetworks.com/

Lifespan-Aware Routing for Wireless Sensor Networks 79
Fig. 1. Classical Shortest Path Simulation
Fig. 2. Cumulative Metric Simulation
The network behaviour of the proposed algorithm [see Fig. 2]w as compared to
the classical hop-countb a s e droutinga lgorithm [see Fig.1 ] .Weh avec ompared
the proposed cumulativem e t ric approach to ac lassical shortest path solution,
where the node chooses its best nexth opa c cordingt o the length oft h es e q u ence
r, for Shortest Path i.e mbest
r = min|r| :{r∈ Rv}.
By network lifetime wed enote the time until the ﬁrst sensor v ofa ll V depletes
its battery bv and weu s eita sas u itablem e a s u r eoft h ealgorithms eﬃciency. In
[Fig.3 ] ,which contains:
– Minimal EnergyL evel, the min(bv) fora ll nodes in V\ S,
– Average EnergyL evel, the avg(bv) fora ll nodes in V\ S,
– Maximal EnergyL evel, the max(bv) fora ll nodes in V\ S,
– Diﬀerence in EnergyL evels, the min(bv)− max(bv) fora ll nodes V\ S
wes how the energy characteristics of the proposed algorithm, the diagrams show
that thenetwork lifetime was signiﬁcantly extended.A fter anumber ofp e r formed
simulationst h e network lifetime oft h ec lassical hopc ounta lgorithm was on
average extended by3 8.37% after changingt o the cumulativem e t ric approach
as the energy discharge characteristics in [Fig. 3] illustrate.
The visualisation in [Fig.1 ] demonstrates how ar andomc ongestion created
at the time oft h econvergence oft h es hortest path network depletes completely

80 A. Czubak and J. Wojtanowski
Fig. 3. Cumulative Metric Simulation
as inglea r e a.I n comparison ac u m ulativem e t ric approach yields a structured
depletion oft h enodes coveringt h ewholea r e ar e t ainingt h ea bilityo ft h es ensor
to analyse the wholea r e a, though less accurately, fora longer period oft ime [see
Fig. 2]. The visualisation in [Fig. 2] demonstrates the power ofr oute diﬀerenti-
ation resulting in workload a uniform workload distribution amonga ll nodes.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
In thisp a p e rweh avep roposed a diﬀerent approach to routing in Wireless Sensor
Networks.T he solution perceives sensor nodes power reserves as a common good
andb e h aves accordingly, whiler e t aining fairness across the network.
Weh ave implemented ands imulated the proposed algorithm.Weh aves hown,
that usingam e t ric which isac ombination oft h eavailablep ower and the recent
power consumption in a node ism ore eﬃcientt h enj ust consideringt h ea mount
of nodes|p| on the path p.T he cumulativem e t ricu s e dfocuses on the lifespano f
the routes used andt h u son the lifetime oft h eentire network,w hich decreases as
more data isb einge ither relayed org enerated across the network.T hisr outing
methodc hooses paths in am anner which aims at ma ximizingt h e lifespano f
the entire network ande nsures that the lifespano f individualn odes remains
relatively uniform across the entire network.
An additional advantage oft his approach,i st h a tall the nodes may be ei-
ther homogeneous or heterogeneous regardinga vailablep ower levelsa ndp ower
consumption economy. In comparison to some other approaches our solution

Lifespan-Aware Routing for Wireless Sensor Networks 81
doesn’tr e q uire everyn ode to be in the range oft h es ink,n ord oes itr e q uire
an artiﬁcial hierarchicaln etwork builtb y election ofm a s t e rnodes,i tr e t ainsa
true peer-to-peer network topology. The designo ft hisr outings olution makes
ite a sy toi ntegrate into any other computer network, because it’sf oundations
bear similarities to the routings t r a t e gies applied toL A Nand WAN networks.
Att hisp oint it isa natural consequence to equipt h eroutings olution proposed
in thisp a p e rwith a schedulings t r a t e gy and a data aggregation mechanism.
References
1. Callaway, E.: Wireless Sensor Networks: Architectures and Protocols. CRC, Boca
Raton (2003)
2. Keshavarzian, A., Lee, H., Venkatraman, L.: Wakeup scheduling in wireless sensor
networks. In: Proc. of the 7th ACM int. Symp. on Mobile ad hoc Netw. and Comp.,
pp. 322–333 (2006)
3. Sang, Y., Shen, H., Inoguchi, Y., Tan, Y., Xiong, N.: Secure Data Aggregation in
Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey. In: Proc. of PDCAT 2007, pp. 315–320 (2006)
4. Shah Mansouri, V., Ghannad Rezaie, M.: Modiﬁed distributed mediation device for
low power consumption in large scale sensor network. In: Proc. of the International
Conference on Intelligent Sensing and Information Processing, pp. 8–13 (2005)
5. Chiasserini, C.F., Rao, R.R.: Routing protocols to maximize battery eﬃciency.
In: Proc. of MILCOM 2000, pp. 496–500 (2000)
6. Lattanzi, E., Regini, E., Acquaviva, A., Bogliolo, A.: Energetic sustainability of
routing algorithms for energy-harvesting wireless sensor networks. Computer Com-
munications 30(14-15), 2976–2986 (2007)
7. Heinzelman, W.R., Kulik, J., Balakrishnan, H.: Adaptive protocols for information
dissemination in wireless sensor networks. In: Proc. of 5th Annual ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. on Mobile Comp. and Netw., pp. 174–185 (1999)
8. Intanagonwiwat, et al.: Directed Diﬀusion for Wireless Sensor Networking.
IEEE/ACM Transactions Networking 11, 2–16 (2003)
9. Heinzelman, W.R., Chandrakasan, A., Balakrishnan, H.: Energy-eﬃcient communi-
cation protocol for wireless microsensor networks. In: Proc. of 33rd Annual Hawaii
Int. Conf. on System Sciences, pp. 10–19 (2000)
10. Braginsky, D., Estrin, D.: Rumor routing algorthim for sensor networks. In: Proc.
of 1st ACM Int. Workshop on WSN and Applications, pp. 22–31 (2002)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 82–91, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
A Machine Learning Approach to Speech Act 
Classification Using Function Words 
James O’Shea, Zuhair Bandar, and Keeley Crockett  
Department of Computing and Mathematics 
Manchester Metropolitan University 
United Kingdom 
{z.bandar,k.crockett,j.d.oshea}@mmu.ac.uk 
Abstract. This paper presents a novel technique for the classification of sen-
tences as Dialogue Acts, based on structural information contained in function 
words. It focuses on classifying questions or non-questions as a generally useful 
task in agent-based systems. The proposed technique extracts salient features  
by replacing function words with numeric tokens and replacing each content 
word with a standard numeric wildcard token. The Decision Tree, which is a 
well-established classification technique, has been chosen for this work.  
Experiments provide evidence of potential for highly effective classification, 
with a significant achievement on a challenging dataset, before any optimisation 
of feature extraction has taken place. 
Keywords: Dialogue Act, Speech Act, Classification, Semantic Similarity,  
Decision Tree. 
1   Introduction 
Dialogue Act (DA) classification is an established element of research in the field of 
Dialogue Management [1-6]. This work is motivated by the application of DA classifi-
cation to natural language interaction with Dialogue Systems (DSs) [7] and Robots [8]. 
The majority of current dialogue systems use Pattern Matching (PM) or Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) to analyse and answer a user utterance. PM systems have 
been reported as the best for developing dialogue systems that seem to be coherent 
and intelligent to users [9]. They support s calability to large numbers of users because 
they do not require preprocessing stages, but are labour intensive and therefore costly 
to develop and maintain. NLP systems have a substantial theoretical basis but require 
a chain of computationally intensive and error-prone stages such as pos-tagging,  
syntactical repair and parsing. This rules them out for web-based systems that must 
service many users in real time.  
Short Text Semantic Similarity (STSS) offers an alternative approach to PM and 
NLP. A user utterance (a unit of dialogue  containing a communicative action [1]) is 
acquired as a Short Text (ST) and compared with a set of prototype STs. The ST with 
the highest similarity to the user utterance is taken to be its meaning.

A Machine Learning Approach to Speech Act Classification Using Function Words 83 
DA theory separates the purpose of the utterance from its propositional content (i.e. 
what it is about). So DAs such as the question “Is the door shut?”, the instruction 
“Shut the door!” and the assertion “The door is shut.” can be derived from the pro-
positional content the door is shut . We believe that classifying the Dialogue Acts 
(DAs) will be a crucial first step in measuring the semantic similarity between a pair 
of STs.  
This paper investigates the hypothesis that DAs can be classified into different 
categories solely using function words. Machine classification of DAs has used  
various techniques including n-gram models [2], Bayesian networks [10] and Deci-
sion Trees (DTs) [3]. These approaches have achieved good results, but they  
use computationally intensive feature extraction which rules them out from future 
real-time applications.  
In this paper 4 techniques are implemented, tested and compared. It is clear that the 
DT approach performs best, producing a Slim Function Word Classifier (SFWC) with 
high computational efficiency and high classification accuracy. We classify DAs  
at a coarse level of granularity as we believe distinguishing between questions,  
instructions and assertions will be most useful in practical DSs [11]and Robotics 
applications [8]. 
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: section 2 briefly reviews recent work 
on DA classification, section 3 provides an overview of DTs - in particular C4.5, 
section 4 outlines the experimental procedure, section 5 discusses the results and 
section 6 contains conclusions and recommendations for future work. 
2   Prior Work 
2.1   Function Words 
Words in the English Language can be divided into Function Words (a closed class of 
structural words such as articles, prepositions, determiners etc.) and Content Words 
(the open classes of nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs). “Stop word” lists contain 
words with a high frequency of occurrence - mostly function words with a few high 
frequency content words mixed in. There is no definitive list of stop words, although 
one by van Rijsbergen [12], which is often cited contains 250 words. Others posted on 
the web contain over 300 [13]. A set of 264 function words was compiled for this 
paper by combining stop word lists, removing the content words and then adding low-
frequency function words from dictionaries. 
Information Retrieval (IR) places a greater  value on content words than function 
words in searching for documents. Spärck-Jones’ [14] TD/IDF approach and Salton’s 
[15] Vector Space Model increased the co ntribution of low frequency words to the 
similarity measurement. Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) removes 439 stop words 
[16], having “little or no difference on the SVD solution.” [17] from the submitted 
terms or documents before comparing them. This list has not been published. Citeseer 
also removes stop words prior to performing word frequency calculation [18].  
The STASIS [19] STSS measure used function words as well as content words  
because they carry structural information which is useful in interpreting sentence 
meaning [19]. However, STASIS can only de tect matches between identical pairs of

84 J. O’Shea, Z. Bandar, and K. Crockett 
function words in the two STs. An improved performance has also recently been 
achieved by an STSS algorithm which makes use of a corpus-based measure com-
bined with string similarity, but filters out function words [20]. 
2.2   Features for DA Classification 
The most common feature used for DA classification is the n-gram, a short string of 
words extracted from a marked up corpus [2, 4]. Large numbers of n-grams are gen-
erated by any real-world corp us so a predictive subset is used (in [3] sets of 10 or 
300). N-grams have been used to code features for Hidden Markov Models [4].  
Bigrams such as CanYou and IWant [10] have been used in Bayesian classifiers, 
which also combined them with the DAs of previous utterances in the dialogue [1]. 
Cue phrases have been used as features for a simple, efficient classifier described 
by Webb et al [2]. A cue phrase is a longer form of n-gram, selected on the basis of 
predictability for particular DA classes. In operation, the classifier examines an utter-
ance for cue phrases and assigns the class of the highest predictive phrase it contains. 
This ignores other potentially valuable information in the utterance. 
In the LSA approach to DA classification [5], the features are terms in a “query”  
vector. A cosine measure is used to determine the vector of the closest matching “docu-
ment” and the DA type of the match is assigned to the query. LSA normally removes 
function words [17], but it is not specified if this is the case with DA classification. 
Keizer et al [10] used 13 surface features to train DTs in a comparison with a 
Bayesian network. Features included length, various starting bigrams, presence of 
particular words, positive/negative references and presence of particular grammatical 
classes. Keizer’s work is pertinent to the work in this paper because it classifies DAs 
into two classes, forward-looking functions (acts that have an effect on following 
dialogue) or backward-looking functions (that relate to previous dialogue).  
The closest work to this paper [3] uses a decision tree trained with a mix of fea-
tures including the presence of a question mark, a count of the occurrences of the 
word OR, utterance length, a bigram of the labels of the last two DAs, n-grams of 
pos-tags for the utterance, n-grams of words in the utterance and the top 10 predictive 
individual words. A review by Verbree et al [3] also refers to the use of verb type and 
cites a number of uses of prosodic features. 
Regardless of their performance, these features are complex and computationally 
intensive to extract, apart from Cue Phrase s which may discard considerable useful 
information. 
2.3   The Slim Function Word Classifier for Dialogue Acts  
The Slim Function Word Classifier (SFWC) approach assumes that sufficient infor-
mation is contained in the function words of an utterance to allow its DA to be classi-
fied. Each word in the utterance is replaced  with a unique token and all content words 
replaced by the same wildcard. This performed efficiently with a lookup table. 
After training a classifier on labeled data, new utterances can be coded with the 
same lookup table and classified. This study focuses on classifying Questions vs. 
Non-questions. However new classifiers can be developed for other DAs and the 
efficiency of this technique supports multi-classifier systems. In particular, DTs are

A Machine Learning Approach to Speech Act Classification Using Function Words 85 
easy to code in assembly language and would probably require the execution of less 
than 100 machine instructions to make a classification. 
The novelty of this work is the simplicity and efficiency of the features, which 
supports scalability for applications with ma ny users (e.g. the UK national flu service 
which received 9.3 million hits per hour on the first day of operation [21]). 
2.4   Evaluation Datasets 
The normal method of evaluating classifiers is to measure their Classification Accu-
racy (CA) on test data which was not used to train the classifier. Comparing DA  
classifiers is difficult as there is no standard dataset for developing and testing them. 
The different datasets used are tagged with different numbers and types of DA [3], 
ranging from 2 [10] to 232 different tags [5]. The sizes of the datasets also vary, from 
223,000 utterances in the Switchboard set [2] to one of 81 utterances for a DT classi-
fier [10]. Variety is also an issue. One dataset of 2794 DAs was drawn from only two 
humans [4] and may not generalize beyond these two people. One example of very 
good performance was a CA of 89.27% for a classifier with over 40 DA categories 
using a large training set [3]. Results can be variable however; another study [6] 
achieved 92.9% on suggestions but scored 0 on queries.  
Classifying a single DA requires a relatively small dataset, so this study collected 
new material using web sources that cover a variety of topics, from a variety of peo-
ple, to test our hypothesis. 
3   Classification Techniques 
Four techniques, Decision Trees, Naïve Bayes, Bayesian Classifiers and Multi-Layer 
Perceptrons (MLP) were investigated for the work in this paper. DT induction is a 
highly effective method of machine learning for classification. One of the most well-
established algorithms is C4.5 [22]. DTs partition the sample space recursively and 
the outcome is a set of rules induced from a training set of example instances previ-
ously labeled with their classes. The chief advantage of DTs over other classifiers is 
that the rules “explain” how they reach their decisions and (combined with pruning) 
provide a greater insight into the problem domain. 
The starting point of a DT is one node with all examples labeled as belonging to 
one class. A node is ‘impure’ if the examples reaching that node are not all in the 
same class. During training impure nodes are successively partitioned to create new, 
purer nodes. The final, leaf, nodes are la beled with the appropriate class. Impure 
leaves, which may occur if the attributes ha ve been tested exhaustively without reach-
ing purity, are labeled with the majority class. An alternative pruning technique, 
Minimum Number of Objects (MNO) removes leaves with fewer than a specified 
number of cases and re-distributes them amongst leaves at the level above in the tree. 
Bayesian techniques, such as Naïve Bayes and the Bayesian Network have  
long been of interest to NLP researchers du e to their statistical origins. The Naïve 
Bayes classifier uses information extracted from a set of example instances to produce 
a probability estimate of the class of a new instance, assuming statistical independ-
ence between the attributes to make the estimate[23]. The Bayesian Network is an

86 J. O’Shea, Z. Bandar, and K. Crockett 
alternative to decision trees, which uses a Directed Acyclic Graph structure[23]. This 
structure is less constrained in allowing linkage between nodes than a pure tree. Also, 
the node does not contain a splitting rule, rather it contains a probability distribution 
that is used to predict the class probab ility for a particular instance. The proposed 
advantage of the Bayesian Network over the DT is that it retains information that is 
lost due to splitting in DTs. However, the Bayesian network is also sensitive to miss-
ing values and this is an issue in handling STs of varying lengths. 
The Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) is an Artificial Neural Network (ANN), mod-
eled on the biological structure of the brain [24]. Inputs are fed through a network of 
simple processing units with weighted connections to produce (in this application) a 
classification output. The MLP is trained using backpropagation, which uses a train-
ing set to modify the weights until the performance is optimised. Of the 4 techniques, 
the MLP is the least transparent in explaining its decisions, however it has the benefit 
of robustness to noise and missing values.  
4   Experimental Procedure 
4.1   Dataset 
In order to investigate the general hypothesis that a DT using function words can 
discriminate between a selected class of dialogue act and the remaining classes, the 
particular case of Questions vs. Non-questions was chosen. This was because prior 
empirical experience with DSs has shown this to be a non-trivial problem and because 
the task is appropriate to other agent-based applications such as robotics. 
Current goal-oriented DSs engage in dialogue over the web in a manner similar to 
instant messaging. Utterances consist of Statement, Question and Instruction DAs. 
Most of the questions put to the agent are similar to those in FAQ lists, requesting 
definitions, clarifications etc. and this determined the dataset. 1,660 questions  
were collected from the highest user-rated FAQ lists from the Usenet news system. 
2288 non-questions were collected from “blogs of note” commended blogs on 
blogspot.com. These were supplemented with other FAQs and Blogs obtained from 
the web so that questions were balanced by non-questions derived from the same 
context. Contexts were highly varied including “IRS”, “Immunisation”, “Tattoo” and 
“Gasoline.” The majority of non-questions were assertions (statements, clarifications 
and answers to previous questions) with some instructions. 
The FAQ questions are straightforward, starting with a limited set of words (e.g. 
What, How, Is, Can, If etc). The non questions rarely started with these words so a set 
of additional non-questions was synthesized (e.g. starting with which, acting as a 
pronoun) to increase the challenge. We have observed empirically that confusion of 
this type of utterance with questions reduces users’ confidence in the agent. The ap-
proach of synthesising rare data is well-established [25]. Sometimes the synthetic 
non-questions are not valid sentences in their own right, but they would make sense as 
a terminating utterance in a dialogue sequence. 
A set of 50% questions, 25% straightforward non-questions and 25% “synthetic” 
questions was randomly sampled from thes e collections (see table 1). For each cate-
gory, a randomly selected sample larger than the target size was taken. The sentences

A Machine Learning Approach to Speech Act Classification Using Function Words 87 
were then pre-processed to restrict the length to a maximum of 25 words, expand 
contracted forms, tokenise them to extract features for DT construction and remove 
duplicates occurring due to loss of information in the tokenising process.  
Table 1. Example training data 
Category Example 
FAQ question Does wearing caps or hats contribute to hair loss? 
Blog non-question Sometimes the psoriasis treatment causes the hair 
loss. 
Synthetic non-question Which in many cases can be cured with a simple 
lotion. 
 
Decision trees require fixed length records, so an upper limit of 25 words was set 
(determined empirically). The final proportions in the dataset were 591 questions and 
615 non-questions. 
4.2   Preprocessing 
Expansion involved a simple table lookup  to replace contracted forms such as Don’t 
with their full forms, i.e. Do not. Some contractions are ambiguous e.g. She’d could 
be She would or She had. For this paper we took a brute force approach of replacing 
all the variants with a single form (e.g. ’d forms with would). This is to avoid complex 
preprocessing as parsing-based disambiguation would increase the computational load 
greatly. Apostrophe usage in forming possessives was ignored and punctuation was 
stripped out as part of preprocessing. This means that the presence of a question mark 
– which has been used as a feature in some studies [3] was not used. 
The sentences were then processed as follows. Words were successively looked up 
in a table of function words and numeric tokens (composed from the list described  
in 1.1). If the word was found it was replaced by the appropriate token (range 1 – 
264). In this experiment the tokens were allocated in ascending order to the alphabeti-
cally sorted list of words, so that 1 represents the word “a” and 264 represents  
“yourselves”. 
If the word was not found it was replaced by the token 0 (indicating a content 
word). If the sentence contained fewer than 25 words, all empty slots were filled with 
a “no word present” token given the value 300 (see table 2). This particular value  
was chosen so that it would be easy for the DT algorithm to partition it from the word 
tokens.  
Table 2. Tokenisation of training data 
Question does wearing caps or hats contribute to hair loss 
Tokenised 
form 
56,0,0,156,0,0,212,0,0,300,300,300,300,300,300,300, 
300, 300, 300,300, 300,300,300,300,300

88 J. O’Shea, Z. Bandar, and K. Crockett 
4.3   Experiments 
4.3.1   Choice of Classifier 
This section evaluates 4 well-established classifiers: Naïve Bayesian, Multi-Layer 
Perceptron, Bayesian Network and C4.5 DT. It  also compares them with two standard 
baseline measures, ZeroR and OneR. Every result reported in this paper used 60-fold 
cross validation and was repeated 9 times so that each reported CA summarises 600 
classifier construction runs. Each classifier was run using its default parameter set-
tings in Weka. Results, reported in table 3, are recorded as percentage CA. All sig-
nificance reporting in this paper uses the corrected re-sampled t-test with α = 0.05. 
Table 3. Classification accuracies for baseline measures and popular classifiers 
Classifier ZeroR OneR Naïve 
Bayes 
MLP Bayes 
Net 
C4.5 
CA 50.99 82.06 55.98 69.14 77.87 88.73 
 
Each increase in CA across the AI classifiers is significant. All of the classifiers 
outperform the ZeroR baseline significantly. C4.5 also outperforms the OneR classi-
fier significantly and consequently was selected for the remaining experiments. The 
high performance of DTs, combined with their efficiency and transparency was con-
clusive in their choice for further experiments. These were conducted to determine  
the best CA and the smallest tree size obtainable by pruning, using the two pruning 
techniques from section 3. DTs were built using the C4.5 (version 8) algorithm.  
Experiments 1 & 2 use Confidence Interval pruning and experiments 3 & 4 use the 
MNO method. 
Tree sizes in the tables below are reported as minimum - maximum numbers of 
nodes. The baseline is always the CA obtained with confidence = 0.25 and MNO = 2.  
4.3.2   Experiments 1 and 2 
Experiment 1 examined the effect of pruning at a series of confidence levels running 
from the default value of 0.25 to 0.05. Table 4 shows that increased pruning leads to a 
significant increase in CA at confidence = 0.2. This reaches a maximum of 89.43 at 
confidence = 0.04.  
Experiment 2 examined the effect of confidence pruning to produce the most com-
pact, efficient tree that did not suffer a statistically significant loss of CA.  
Experiment 1 was repeated, using pruning confidence intervals running from 
0.0005 to 0.0001. At confidence = 0.0002 the reduction in CA from the baseline was 
significant. Table 5 shows that pruning at confidence = 0.0003 yields a good combi-
nation of tree size and CA. 
Table 4. Results of pruning in experiment 1 
Conf 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 
CA 88.73 89.31 89.32 89.35 89.37 
Tree Size 89-147 79-135 79-131 69-117 59-101

A Machine Learning Approach to Speech Act Classification Using Function Words 89 
Table 5. Results of pruning in experiment 2 
Conf 0.0005 0.0004 0.0003 0.0002 0.0001 
CA 88.48  88.25 87.74 85.29 84.21 
Tree Size  53-97 51-95 45-91 43-87 43-87 
4.3.3   Experiments 3 and 4 
Experiment 3 examined the effect of pruning at a series of MNO levels running from 
the default value of 2 to 20. Table 6 shows that increased pruning does not discover a 
significant increase in CA. At MNO = 15 the reduction in CA from the baseline was 
reported as significant.  
Table 6. Results of pruning in experiment 3 
MNO 2 5 10 15 20 
CA 88.73 88.97 88.29 85.83 83.64 
Tree Size 89-147 59-99 45-65 31-57 27-45 
 
Experiment 4 examined the effect of MNO pruning to produce the most compact, 
efficient tree that did not suffer a statistical ly significant loss of CA. It repeated the 
process of experiment 3, using pruning MNO levels running from 10 to 14 instances. 
At MNO = 14 the reduction in CA from the baseline was significant. Table 7 shows 
that pruning at MNO = 13 yields a good combination of tree size and CA. 
Table 7. Results of pruning in experiment 4 
MNO 10 11 12 13 14 
CA 88.29 87.89 87.49 86.83 85.7 
Tree Size  45-65 39-63 41-59 35-59 33-61 
5   Discussion of Results 
The ZeroR baseline for CA is 51%. Confidence level pruning achieves 89.43 % CA at 
0.04 and MNO pruning achieved 88.97 at 5 instances per leaf. These results are good 
but it is difficult to compare them with other studies directly [3]. 
The average baseline tree size is 118 nodes. Pruning at confidence level 0.0003 re-
duces the average tree size to 47 nodes without a statistically significant reduction in 
CA. Pruning at MNO = 13 reduces the tree size to 46 nodes. The maximum depth of 
nesting of a 49 node tree (MNO = 13) is 11, so an efficient implementation would 
have a very low computational overhead. 
6   Conclusions and Future Work 
The results provide strong evidence to support the hypothesis that function words 
alone can discriminate between one major cl ass of speech act (questions) and others

90 J. O’Shea, Z. Bandar, and K. Crockett 
(assertions, instructions etc.). Statistically  significant results (using the corrected re-
sampled t-test) for CA well above baseline have been obtained. The reduction in tree 
size from pruning provides further strong evidence that true generalisation is taking 
place. Function word features spanning a range from the 1 st to the 11th word are being 
combined, so the technique is exploiting genuinely new information. 
Future work will involve the following. Firstly, optimisation of feature extraction 
could yield a significant improvement in CA. For example, pronouns such as “I” (99), 
“me” (120) and “you” (260) are currently widely separated in the input space. Ex-
periments will investigate whether clustering words by function reduces top-level 
splitting to make more information available for later stages in the tree. 
Secondly, further classifiers will be deve loped to cover the full range of DAs.  
Collection of an Instruction / Non-instruction dataset, which is highly relevant to 
Robotics dialogue [8, 26] is already in progress. 
Thirdly, the technique will be extended to cover Indirect DAs. Straightforward 
questions are often embedded in other text, e.g. a problem description posted in a 
forum followed by “can you help?” There will also be an extension to forms like “I 
don’t know how to . . .”. 
Finally, it has become clear that function words can perform multiple functions 
with varying degrees of likelihood. For example “Since” can be either a preposition or 
a conjunction. Fuzzy DTs and ANNs should improve performance by allowing  
function words to participate in different function sets with varying degrees of set 
membership. 
References 
1. Keizer, S.: A Bayesian Approach to Dialogue Act Classification. In: BI-DIALOG 2001 the 
5th Workshop on Formal Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue, pp. 88–94. ZiF, Bielefeld 
(2001) 
2. Webb, N., Hepple, M., Wilks, Y.: Dialogue Act Classification Based on Intra-Utterance 
Features. In: AAAI 2005. AAAI Press, Pittsburgh (2005) 
3. Verbree, D., Rienks, R., Heylen, D.: Dialogue-Act Tagging Using Smart Feature Selec-
tion; Results On Multiple Corpora. In: IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop,  
pp. 70–73. IEEE Press, New York (2006) 
4. Venkataraman, A., Stolcke, A., Shriberg, E.: Automatic Dialog Act Labeling With Mini-
mal Supervision. In: 9th Australian International Conference on Speech Science and Tech-
nology (2002) 
5. Serafin, R., Di Eugenio, B., Glass, M.: Latent Semantic Analysis for dialogue act classifi-
cation. In: The 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology (2003) 
6. Wermter, S., Lochel, M.: Learning Dialog Act Processing. In: COLING 1996, 16th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics (1996) 
7. Li, Y., Bandar, Z., McLean, D., O’Shea, J.: A method for measuring sentence similarity 
and its application to conversational agents. In: The 17th International Florida Artificial In-
telligence Research Society Conference (FLAIRS 2004), pp. 820–825. AAAI Press, Menlo 
Park (2004)

A Machine Learning Approach to Speech Act Classification Using Function Words 91 
8. Längle, T., Lüth, T., Stopp, E., Herzog, G., Kamstrup, G.: KANTRA - A Natural Lan-
guage Interface for Intelligent Robots. In: Intelligent Autonomous Systems (IAS 4),  
pp. 357–364 (1995) 
9. Bickmore, T., Giorgino, T.: Health dialog systems for patients and consumers. J. Biomed. 
Inform. 39(5), 556–571 (2006) 
10. Keizer, S., op den Akker, R., Nijholt, A.: Dialogue Act Recognition with Bayesian Net-
works for Dutch Dialogues. In: Third SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,  
pp. 88–94 (2002) 
11. Crockett, K., Bandar, Z., O’Shea, J., McLean, D.: Bullying and Debt: Developing Novel 
Applications of Dialogue Systems. In: Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical Dialogue 
Systems (IJCAI), Pasadena (2009) 
12. van Rijsbergen, C.: Information Retrieval. Butterworths, Boston (1980) 
13. Sanderson, M.: http://ftp.dcs.glasgow.ac.uk/idom/ir_resources/ 
linguistic_utils/stop_words 
14. Spärck-Jones, K.: A Statistical Interpretation of Term Specificity and its Application in 
Retrieval. Journal of Documentation 28, 11–21 (1972) 
15. Salton, G., Wong, A., Yang, C.: A Vector Space Model for Automatic Indexing. Commu-
nications of the ACM 18(11), 613–620 (1975) 
16. Deerwester, S., Dumais, S., Furnas, G., Harshman, R., Landauer, T., Lochbaum, K., 
Streeter, L.: Computer information retrieval using Latent Semantic Structure. Bell Com-
munications Research Inc. U.S.P. Office (1989) 
17. Deerwester, S., Dumais, S., Furnas, G., Landauer, T., Harshman, R.: Indexing by Latent 
Semantic Analysis. Journal of the American Society of Information Science 41(6),  
391–407 (1990) 
18. Bollacker, K., Lawrence, S., Giles, C.: CiteSeer: An Autonomous Web Agent for Auto-
matic Retrieval and Identification of Interesting Publications. In: 2nd International ACM 
Conference on Autonomous Agents, pp. 116–123. ACM Press, New York (1998) 
19. Li, Y., Bandar, Z., McLean, D., O’Shea, J.: Sentence Similarity Based on Semantic Nets 
and Corpus Statistics. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 18(8), 
1138–1150 (2006) 
20. Islam, A., Inkpen, D.: Semantic Text Similari ty using Corpus-Based Word Similarity and 
String Similarity. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 2(2), 1–25 
(2008) 
21. BBC, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/8166444.stm 
22. Quinlan, J.: C4.5: programs for machine learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San 
Mateo (1993) 
23. Witten, I., Eibe, F.: Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 2nd 
edn. Elsevier, San Francisco (2005) 
24. Aleksander, I., Morton, H.: Introduction to Neural Computing. International Thomson 
Computer Press (1995) 
25. Quinlan, J.: Induction of Decision Trees. Machine Learning 1(1), 81–106 (1986) 
26. Fong, T., Grange, S., Thorpe, C., Baur, C.: Multi-robot remote driving with collaborative 
control. In: IEEE International Workshop on Robot-Human Interactive Communication 
(2001)

Neural Networks for Solving the Superposition
Problem Using Approximation Method
and Adaptive Learning Rate
Th´eophile K. Dagba1, Villevo Adanhounm`e2, and S`emiyou A. Ad´edjouma3
1 Ecole Nationale d’Economie Appliqu´ee et de Management
Universit´e d’Abomey-Calavi
03 BP 1079 Cotonou, Republic of Benin
theophile.dagba@eneam.uac.bj
2 International Chair of Mathematical Physics and Applications
(ICMPA-UNESCO Chair) Universit´e d’Abomey-Calavi
072 BP 50 Cotonou, Republic of Benin
adanhounm@yahoo.fr
3 Ecole Polytechnique d’Abomey-Calavi
Universit´e d’Abomey-Calavi
01 BP 2009 Cotonou, Republic of Benin
semiyou.adedjouma@epac.uac.bj
Abstract. An algebraic approach for representing multidimensional non-
linear functions by feedforward neural networks is implemented for the
approximation of smooth batch data containing input-output of the hid-
den neurons and the ﬁnal neural output of the network. The training
set is associated to the adjustable parameters of the network by weight
equations. Then we have obtained the exact input weight of the nonlinear
equations and the approximated output weight of the linear equations us-
ing the conjugate gradient method with an adaptive learning rate. Using
a multi-agents system as diﬀerent kinds of energies for the plant growth,
one can predict the height of the plant.
Keywords: function approximation, conjugate gradient method, adap-
tive training, multi-agents systems.
1 Introduction
ArtiﬁcialF eedforward NeuralN etworks (FNNs) haveb e enw idely used in many
application areas in recent years andh aves hown theirs t r ength in solvingc om-
plex problems in ArtiﬁcialI ntelligence.A lthough many diﬀerentm odels of neural
networks haveb e en proposed, multilayered FNNsa r et h ecommonest.I no rder
to train an FNN, supervised training isp robably the most frequently used tech-
nique.T he trainingp rocess isa ni ncremental adaptation ofc onnection weights
that propagate information between simplep rocessingu nits called neurons.T he
neurons are arranged in layers andc onnectionsb e tween the neurons of one layer
andt hose oft h enexte xist.A lso, onec an use an algebraict r aining [1] which is
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 92–99, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Neural Networks for Solving the Superposition Problem 93
the approach for approximatingm ultidimensional nonlinear functionsb yF N Ns
based on available input-output.T ypically, training involves the numericalo p-
timization oft h ee r rorb e tween the data andt h ea c t u aln etwork’sp e r formance
with respect toi ts adjustable parametersor weights. Considerablee ﬀort has gone
into developingt e c hniques for acceleratingt h econvergence oft h e s eoptimization-
based traininga lgorithms ([2],[3],[4]). Another line of research has focused on the
mathematicali n vestigation of network’s approximation properties ([5],[6],[7]).
The latter results provide few practical guidelines for implementingt h et r aining
algorithms, andt h ey cannotb eu s e dto evaluate the properties oft h esolutions
obtained byn umericalo ptimization. The algebraict r aining approach provides a
unifyingf r a m ework that can be used both to train the network andt oi n vesti-
gate their approximation properties.T he data are associated to the adjustable
parameters by means of neuraln etwork input-output.H ence the nonlinear train-
ingp rocess andr elated approximation properties can be investigated via linear
algebra.
In thisp a p e r, the NeuralN etworks haveb e en applied eﬃciently for the predic-
tion oft h eplanth eight.T he remainingp a r tof the paper is organized as follows:
in section 2 wep ropose an algebrict r aininga lgorithm with an adaptive learning
rate based on the conjugate gradientm e t hod [10]. In section 3, am ulti-agents
system, as energies fort h eplantg rowth,i sc onsidered ands imulation results of
experiments are presented.T he last two sectionsc ontain the discussion andt h e
conclusion.
2 Framework
2.1 Development of the Algebraic Approach
The objective ist o approximate smooth scalar functions of q inputs:
h, gi : Rq → R i =1··· s (1)
using a feedforward sigmoidaln etwork.T ypically, the functionst o be approx-
imated are u nknown analytically, but a prec ise set of input-to-nodes samples
{xk,vik}k=1···p andap r e cise set of input-output samples{xk,u k}k=1···p can be
generated as follows
vik = gi(xk) ,u k = h(xk) ∀ k (2)
These sets ofs a m ples are referred to as trainings e t s.W e assume that:
– the sca lar output yi oft h e i-th neuron belongingt o the hiddenl ayer is
computed as:
yi = f[xT wi + θi] ,w i =[ wi1··· wiq]T (3)
where wij, 1≤ j ≤ q are the weights connecting q inputs to the i-th
hiddenn euron oft h enetwork, θi ist h einput bias oft h ei-th neuron and f
the sigmoidal function oft h ehiddenl ayer deﬁned as follows
f(τ)= eτ− e−τ
eτ + e−τ (4)

94 T.K. Dagba, V. Adanhounm` e, and S.A. Ad´edjouma
– the ﬁnal scalar output oft h enetwork z isc omputed as a nonlinear transfor-
mation oft h eweighted sumoft h einput-to-node variables ni with i =1··· s:
z = νT f[wx + θ]+ λ (5)
where
f[n]=[ f(n1)··· f(ns)]T (6)
n = wx + θ =[ n1··· ns]T (7)
w =( wij)1≤i≤s;1≤j≤q; θ =[ θ1··· θs]T (8)
and λ the output bias.
Remark. In the general case,o nec an choose s hiddenl ayer activation functions
fi, 1≤ i≤ s.T he activation function fort h eoutput neuron isc hosen as the
identity function.
The computationaln euraln etwork matches the trainings e t{xk,vik,u k}k=1···p
exactly if, given the input xk,i tp roduces vik and uk as follows
yi(xk)= vik; z(xk)= uk (9)
which lead to
vi
k = f[(xk)T wi + θi] (10)
uk = νT f[wxk + θ]+ λ (11)
where νi, 1≤ i≤ s are the weights connecting s hiddenn euronst o the output
neuron. Groupingt h eknown elements vik and uk fromt h et r ainings e tin the
vectors vi =[ vi1··· vip]T ,u =[ u1··· up]T the equations (10) and (11) can be
written usingm a t rix notation
vi = f[ni]( 1 2)
u = Sν + Λ (13)
which are referred to as weight equations,w here
ni =[ ni1··· nip]T ; nik =( xk)T wi + θi (14)
f[ni]=[ f[ni1]··· f[nip]]T ; Λ =[ λ··· λ]T (15)
S =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
f[n11] f[n21]··· f[ns1]
f[n12] f[n22]··· f[ns2]
··· ··· ···
f[n1p] f[n2p]··· f[nsp]
⎞
⎟⎟⎠

Neural Networks for Solving the Superposition Problem 95
2.2 The Proposed Algorithm
Our aim ist o ﬁndt h eweight wi.F romt h eweight equation (12)w eg e t
vi = f[ni] ⇐⇒ vik = f[(xk)
T
wi + θi] ∀k =1··· p. (16)
which leads to
(xk)T wi = f −1[vik]− θi (17)
forﬁ xed k,w here f −1(ξ)= 1
2 ln
(
1+ξ
1−ξ
)
. The solution oft h esystem (17)i s not
unique but there exists a unique pseudosolution i.e. the weight wi with the least
norm belongingt o the set of weights wi such that the errorf unction
E(wi)=[ f −1[vi
k]− θi− (xk)T wi]2 (18)
can be minimized.T hisp s e u dosolution ist h esolution oft h esystem (17) deﬁned
as follows
wi = f −1[vik]− θi
⟨xk,xk⟩xk (19)
where⟨.⟩denotes the inner product.
Ast h eweights wi are known fromt h er elation (19), S ist h ep×s known ma-
trix. Without loss ofg eneralityw ec an choose Λ =0[ 1 ] .M oreover the system of
linear equations (13) admits a unique pseudosolution i.e. the weight ν∗ with the
least norm oft h es e tof weights such that the errorf unction Ω(ν)= ‖u− Sν‖2
can be minimized [11]. Then the pseudosolution can be computed by the ap-
proximated method namely the conjugate gradientm e t hodf ort h eminimization
of Ω(ν). Usingt h ec onjugate gradientm e t hod [10] wec onstruct the seque nce
{νm}m∈N convergentt o the unique pseudosolution ν∗ of the equat ion (13) so
that
ST Sν ∗ = ST u (20)
νm+1 = νm + αmdm; m =0 , 1, 2, 3,··· (21)
where νm is the curre ntp oint, dm as e a r c hdirection and αm the steplength.
Various choices oft h ed irection dm giver ise to distinct algorithms.A broad
class ofm e t hods use−dm =∇Ω(νm) as a search direction andt h es t e plength
αm isg iven by means ofe ither an exact lines e a r c h
min
αm>0
Ω
(
νm− αm∇Ω(νm)
)
(22)
ora ni n exact lines e a r c hs a tisfying Wolfe’sc onditions [3]. T he widely used
gradient-based traininga lgorithm,n amed batch back -propagation (BP) mini-
mizes the errorf unction usingt h efollowing steepest descentm e t hod with con-
stant, heuristically chosen, learningr a t eα:
νm+1 = νm− α∇Ω(νm). (23)
Clearly, the behaviour ofa ny algorithm depends on the choice oft h es t e plength
not less than the choice oft h es e a r c hdirection. It is well known that pure gradient

96 T.K. Dagba, V. Adanhounm` e, and S.A. Ad´edjouma
descentm e t hods with ﬁxed learningr a t et endt o be ineﬃcient [4]. The proposed
algorithm isa n adaptive learningr a t ealgorithm based on the conjugate gradient
method.T he motivation fort hisc hoice ist h a titp rovides the fast convergence
of the approximation method which yields the iteration:
νm+1 = νm−⟨Sdm; Sνm− u⟩
⟨Sdm; Sdm⟩dm (24)
where
d0 = 2[ST Sν0− ST u]( 25)
dm = 2[ST Sνm− ST u]+ ⟨ST Sνm− ST u; ST Sνm− ST u⟩
⟨ST Sνm−1− ST u; ST Sνm−1− ST u⟩dm−1 (26)
where m =1 , 2, 3,··· .F urthermore the learningr a t eαm can be writteni n the
form:
αm =⟨Sdm; Sνm− u⟩
⟨Sdm; Sdm⟩ (27)
3 Experiments and Results
Modellingh a sb e come a veryi mportantt ool in the modern science and research.
Scientists use modellingt o test hypotheses, to evaluate the performance ofs ys-
tems, to explore some ﬁelds that are diﬃcultt o assess by experimentation. Many
researches on plantg rowth modelling were done duringt h ef ew past years.T hose
works are based on various mathematical approaches.T he method ofﬁ nite el-
ements isu s e din [15] w here the auth ors propose a t ool fort h es imulation of
the behaviour ofp lants that are in the process ofg rowing.D eR eﬀyea ndh is
team [16] haveb uiltam odel based on the probability theory. Finite automata
theoryi su s e din [18] fort h eformulation ofp lantg rowth dynamics, anda Se-
quentialL earning NeuralN etwork (SLNN) isa p plied in [19] toA sian corn borer
forecasting.T he method wep ropose in this paper has bee n applied to ap lant
growth model based on the received energyw hich must be equa l to the spent
energy accordingt o energy conservation law. Weh aveam u lti-agents system
which containsf our agents :
– agent ofe nergy received by the plant ;
– agent ofe nergy spentf ort h eneeds ofp hotosynthesisp rocess ;
– agent ofe nergy spentf ort h eplantg rowth ;
– agent ofe nergy spentf or nutritive substance transport.
In o rder t o determinet h ep lanth e ight weu s et h em a t h e m a tical modelling
([12],[13]) o ft h ep lantg r owth that a llowst o deﬁnet h ep lanth e ight δ as
follows:
δ(t)=
√
a
b
et
√
ab− e−t
√
ab
et
√
ab + e−t
√
ab (28)
where a and b are positive parameters andt h e r eexists the followingr elations:
x1(t)=3 [ δ(t)]2; x2(t)= 2[δ(t)]2 (29)

Neural Networks for Solving the Superposition Problem 97
x3(t)=[ δ(t)]2{1− [δ(t)]2}; x4(t)=[ δ(t)]4 (30)
and xj(t), 1≤ j≤ 4 ist h eenergy fort h ea r bitrary planta tat ime t :
– x1(t)i st h ee nergy received by the plantb y means oft h e light eﬀect via
photosynthesisa tat ime t;
– x2(t)i st h eenergy spentf ort h eneeds ofp hotosynthesisp rocess at a time t;
– x3(t)i st h eenergy spentf ort h eplantg rowth at a time t;
– x4(t)i st h eenergy spentf or nutritive substance transport at a time t.
Fors implicity reasons wec hoose a = b =1 and p = 100 and the data set gets
the form:
{xk =[ x1(tk),x2(tk),x3(tk),x4(tk)]T ; uk = δ(tk); vik; k =1··· 100} (31)
where vik are chosen randomly in the interval[ 0, 1[. Putting
wi(tk)=[ wi1(tk),wi2(tk),wi3(tk),wi4(tk)]T (32)
the equation (19) can be written
wi1(tk)= 3
2
f −1[vik]− θi
[δ(tk)]6− [δ(tk)]4 + 7[δ(tk)]2 (33)
wi2(tk)= 2 f −1[vik]− θi
[δ(tk)]6− [δ(tk)]4 + 7[δ(tk)]2 (34)
wi3(tk)= 1
2
f −1[vik]− θi
[δ(tk)]6− [δ(tk)]4 + 7[δ(tk)]2{1− [δ(tk)]2} (35)
wi4(tk)= 1
2
f −1[vik]− θi
[δ(tk)]4− [δ(tk)]2 + 7 (36)
Choosing θi =−1 the 100× 5 matrix S isk nown andc hoosingt h einitial ap-
proximated solution ν0 randomly wec an apply the equation (24).
The network consists of 3l ayers.T he input layer has 4 nodes.S i nce there are
only 4 input nodes, the number ofh iddenn odes was chosen to be 5. Too few
hiddenn odes limita network’sg eneralization capabilities,w hilet oo many hidden
nodes can result in overtraining orm e morization by the network.T he output
layer consists ofas ingle node representing the height oft h eplant in time period t.
MATLAB isu s e dfort h eimplementation. The mean square error (MSE)i su s e d
to compare our adaptiver a t ealgorithm with ﬁxed rates algorithms.S imulations
show that the choice of the proper initialw eights is importantf ora lgorithms
convergence. Results are shown on the tableb elow where α ist h elearningr a t e,
e the number of currente pochs oft r aininga nd n the totaln umber ofe pochs to
be trained (for instance n = 200).
MSE
 Number ofe pochs
 MSE
 Number ofe pochs
α =0 .01
 0.001
 116
 0.01
 14
α =0 .5
 0.001
 8
 0.01
 8
α =( 1− e
n )2
 0.001
 8
 0.01
 8
αm = ⟨Sdm;Sνm−u⟩
⟨Sdm;Sdm⟩
 0.001
 4
 0.01
 2

98 T.K. Dagba, V. Adanhounm` e, and S.A. Ad´edjouma
4 Discussion
Usingt h ealgebraic approach we obtain the weight equations which can be com-
patible or incompatible.T he pseudosolutionsf or these equationsa r et h eg eneral-
ization oft h esolutions obtained in [1]. The approach with these solutionsc an be
used eﬃciently fort h eidentiﬁcation andc ontrol ofd ynamical systems, mapping
the input-output representation ofa n unknown system and its control law[ 1 ] .
Usingt h ec onjugate gradientm e t hod wec ontruct the seque nce convergentt o
the pseudosolution, in other words wep r e dict the height oft h eplant;w ec an
also apply thism e t hodt o predict the size oft h ebiological population.
5C o n c l u s i o n
The techniques developed in thisp a p e rm a t c hinput-output information approx-
imately ore xactly byn euraln etworks.T he adjustable parameters or weights are
determined by solvinga lgebraice q u a tionsa ndb y usingt h econjugate gradient
method.T he algorithms used are derived basing on the exact and approximated
solutions of input-output weight equations.T heire ﬀectiveness isd e monstrated
by training feedforward neuraln etworks which produce a planth eight.T he ex-
perimentationss how that our combination oft h ea lgebraic approach andt h e
fast convergentc onjugate gradientm e t hod isau s e f ul approach to solvem any
complex problems.
References
1. Ferrari, S., Stengel, R.F.: Smooth Function Approximation Using Neural Networks.
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 16(1), 24–38 (2005)
2. Rumelhart, D., Inton, G.E., Williams, R.J.: Learning representations by back-
propagating errors. Nature 323, 533–536 (1986)
3. Wolfe, P.H.: Convergence conditions for ascend methods. SIAM Review 11,
226–235 (1969)
4. Polak, E.: Optimization: Algorithms and Consistent Approximations. Springer,
Heidelberg (1997)
5. Jacobs, R.A.: Increased rates of convergence through learning rate adaptation.
Neural Netw. 1(4), 295–308 (1988)
6. Rigler, A.K., Irvine, J.M., Vogl, T.P.: Rescaling of variables in back-propagation
learning. Neural Netw. 3(5), 561–573 (1990)
7. Kolmogorov, A.N.: On the representation of continuous function of several variables
by superposition of continuous functions of one variable and addition. Dokl. Akad.
Nauk SSSR 114, 953–956 (1957)
8. Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., White, H.: Multi-layer feeforward networks are uni-
versal approximators. Neural Netw. 2, 359–366 (1989)
9. Baron, A.R.: Universal approximation bounds for superposition of a sigmoidal func-
tions. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 39(3), 930–945 (1993)
10. Vassiliev, F.L.: Numerical Methods for the optimization problems. Nauk, Moscow
(1988) (in Russian)

Neural Networks for Solving the Superposition Problem 99
11. Beklemichev, D.: Cours de g´eometrie analytique et d’alg`ebre lin´eaire. Editions Mir,
Moscou (1988)
12. Bavrine, I.I.: High mathematics. Instruction, Moscow (1980) (in Russian)
13. Dagba, T.K., Adanhounm`e, V., Ad´edjouma, S.A.: Mod´elisation de la croissance des
plantes par la m´ethode d’apprentissage supervis´e du neurone. In: Premier colloque
de l’UAC des sciences, cultures et technologies, math´ematiques, Abomey-Calavi,
Benin, pp. 245–250 (2007)
14. Dembel´e, J.-M., Cambier, C.: Mod´elisation multi-agents de syst`emes physiques:
application `al ’ ´erosion coti`ere. In: CARI 2006, Cotonou, Benin, pp. 223–230 (2006)
15. Fourcaud, T.: Analyse du comportement m´ ecanique d’une plante en croissance
par la m´ethode des ´el´ements ﬁnis. PhD thesis, Universit´e de Bordeaux 1, Talence,
France (1995)
16. De Reﬀye, P., Edelin, C., Jaeger, M.: La mod´elisation de la croissance des plantes.
La Recherche 20(207), 158–168 (1989)
17. Rostand-Mathieu, A.: Essai sur la mod´elisation des interactions entre la croissance
et le d´eveloppement d’une plante, cas du mod`ele greenlab. Ph.D thesis, Ecole Cen-
trale de Paris, France (2006)
18. Wu, L., Le Dimet, F.-X., De Reﬀye, P., Hu, B.-G.: A new Mathematical Formula-
tion for Plant Structure Dynamics. In: CARI 2006, Cotonou, Benin, pp. 353–360
(2006)
19. Deng, C., Xiong, F., Tan, Y., He, Z.: Sequential learning neural network and its
application in agriculture. In: IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Net-
works, vol. 1, pp. 221–225 (1998)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 100–109, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Distributed Data Mining System Based on Multi-agent 
Communication Mechanism∗ 
Sung Gook Kim1, Kyeong Deok Woo1, Jerzy Bala2, and Sung Wook Baik1,∗∗ 
1 Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, Korea 
{sgkim,kdwoo}@sju.ac.kr, 
sbaik@sejong.ac.kr 
2 Datamat Systems Research, Inc. 
1600 International Drive, McLean, VA 22102, USA 
jbala@dsri.com 
Abstract. This paper presents an overview of a distributed data mining system 
developed according to two approaches; 1) distributed data modeling and 2) 
distributed decision making. A communication mechanism between multi-
agents was established in the system, in order to achieve two approaches to deal 
with information processing in a distributed way. An algorithm for each  
approach has been modified from the original forms of decision tree building/ 
making algorithms so that it can work under multi-agents computing environ-
ments as well as single computing envir onments. This system is evaluated over 
a test bed of US census bureau statistical data set collected in the 1990s. For a 
comparison of the distributed analysis version with the single version with  
respect to analysis results, the data set was disjoined into two-four different  
databases which were deployed in different local sites. 
1   Introduction 
The value of data becomes extremely high when useful information/knowledge ob-
tained from these data is provided to a variety of real world domains such as business 
finance, insurance, scientific observation and so on. Even though massive amounts of 
data in digital forms are rapidly collected and stored, these data might be incomplete 
to find solutions to some specific problems.  These data are naturally located at geo-
graphically distributed sites, and some of them are relevant to each other. If many sets 
of data can be connected with each other in  such a distributed environment, dealing 
with more difficult and complicate problems will be possible. An intuitive approach 
for data analysis in a distributed way is to transfer all of the data to a central data 
repository and then to analyze them with a single data mining system. However, even 
though this guarantees accurate results of data analysis, the approach requires overly 
expensive computation and communication cost s. Not considering such costs, apply-
ing this approach to practical domains is impossible due to a critical security problem 
in revealing private information data.  
                                                           
 ∗ This work is supported by the Seoul R & BD program (JP090972). 
∗∗ Corresponding author.

Distributed Data Mining System Based on Multi-agent Communication Mechanism 101 
The selection of data mining algorithms is very restricted since there are some ob-
stacles to overcome in order to achieve a distributed way in their own application 
domains. A decision tree classification algorithm, one of many data mining algo-
rithms is applicable to a variety of tasks for distributed data analyses. When it is based 
on the decision tree classification algorithm, the distributed data mining can be easily 
achieved with 1) privacy preserving issues [1] which are major concerns in inter-
enterprise data mining when dealing with pr ivate databases located at different sites, 
and 2) knowledge grid features [2, 3] which are for knowledge discovery services 
with high performance in several grids frameworks. This algorithm is popularly used 
in a high level learning [4] with in-place strategies in which sampling data can be 
locally analyzed and local results at their lo cal sites are combined at a central site to 
aggregate the final and global data model.  
This paper presents a distributed data mining mechanism based on the decision tree 
classification algorithm, which includes privacy preserving and knowledge grid fea-
tures. The following two sections describe distributed data modeling and decision 
making approaches within the decision tree classification mechanism with the two 
aforementioned main features for distributed data mining.  
2   Distributed Data Modeling Approach 
This section presents an agent based distributed data mining approach, in which the 
modified decision tree algorithm on an agent based framework can deal with hetero-
geneous data sets in the distributed environment and produce accurate global results. 
Data mining based on the algorithm takes full advantage of all the available data 
through a mechanism for integrating data from a wide variety of sources and is able to 
handle data characterized by geographic (or logical) distribution, complexity and 
multi feature representations, and vertical partitioning/distribution of feature sets.  
The distributed learning algorithm of a d ecision tree in an agent-mediator communi-
cation mechanism is shown in Fig 1 and the functions of the algorithm are described 
as follows: 
 
initializeAgent():   To initiate local agents associated with local data mining 
mission for their own databases. 
findAttribute():   To find the attribute (and its associated value) that can 
discriminate the given data in the best way to split them 
into the various training classes during local mining. 
sendBestAttr():   To send the best local attribute (and its associated value) 
to the mediator. 
selectBestAttr():   To select the best attribute from the best local attributes of 
all the agents. 
notifyAgent(result):   To notify each agent of its role for the next action (split-
ting or waiting). 
splitData(data):   To split the data, according to the best global attribute and 
its associated split value in the formation of two separate 
clusters of data in the selected agent.

102 S.G. Kim et al. 
distribSplitData(data) :   To distribute the structural information in each cluster and 
the best attribute to the other agents. 
generateRule() :   To generate decision rules at each agent. 
sendRule() :   To send decision rules, and notify the mediator for termi-
nation. 
terminateAgent() :   To terminate the agent. 
 
loop
opt
Winning Agent : Agent Losing Agent : AgentMediator : Mediator
initializeAgent() initializeAgent()
return done return done
 [is AnyDa ta =true] :  findAttribute()  [is AnyDa ta =true] :  findAttribute()
s endB es tAttr(a ttr,  va lue) s endB es tAttr(a ttr,  va lue)
s electB es tAttr()
notifyAgent(res ult) notifyAgent(res ult)
return done return done
 [result=no] : wait() [res ult=yes ] :  s plitDa ta (da ta )
ditribS plitData(data)
return donereturn done
generateR ule() generateR ule()
send Ru l e(ru l e) s endR ule(rule)
terminateAgent()
<<des troy>> termina teAgent()
<<des troy>>
return done return done
 
Fig. 1. UML sequence diagram for distributed data mining based on decision tree classification  
Table 1. Sample database for data mining 
SSN Age sex degree Job salary birthplace 
346-82-4452 28 M M.A Salesman $ 2700 New York 
276-25-1134 45 M B.A Plumber $ 3200 L.A. 
548-35-4491 29 F B.A Salesman $ 2500 Chicago 
477-16-8423 56 F Ph.D Professor $ 6300 New York 
625-37-2579 33 M M.A bank clerk $ 5600 Detroit

Distributed Data Mining System Based on Multi-agent Communication Mechanism 103 
An example of generation of a decision tree from two distributed databases is 
given by comparison with the typical tree generation from a single database in order 
to provide an intuitive understanding of the distributed learning algorithm of a deci-
sion tree. Table 1 and Fig 2 present a sample database including some attributes and a 
sample decision tree generated from the single database, respectively. 
 
 
Fig. 2. Complete decision tree generated from the database shown in Table 1 
Table 2 and Fig 3 present two distributed databases and a partial decision tree gen-
erated from these two databases shown in Table 2, respectively. In Table 2, each  
database consists of a primary key (Social Security Number) and three attributes used 
in data analysis. The orders of records in these databases are different from each other 
but these records can be virtually connected during distributed data mining. Four of 
six attributes were used in building the decision tree shown in Fig 2. It is impossible 
to generate the decision tree result with only one database since all of the four attrib-
utes are not in a certain database. In Fig 3, an ‘age’ attribute was selected to split data 
group in a left side, and information about split tree was copied to the right side. After 
that, another attribute called ‘salary’ was selected on the right side. 
Table 2. Two distributed databases separated from the database shown in Table 1 
Table of site A                                                                  Table of site B 
 
SSN age sex degree SSN Job salary birthplace 
346-82-4452 28 M M.A 548-35-4491 salesman $2500 Chicago 
276-25-1134 45 M B.A 346-82-4452 salesman $2700 New York 
548-35-4491 29 F B.A 
 
625-37-2579 bank clerk $5600 Detroit 
477-16-8423 56 F Ph.D  276-25-1134 plumber $3200 L.A.

104 S.G. Kim et al. 
 
Fig. 3. Partial decision tree generated through distributed data mining with two agents 
3   Distributed Decision Making Approach 
This section focuses on a description of a distributed decision making algorithm based 
on a decision tree model in distributed situations. The decision tree model is shown in 
Fig 2. as an example of data analysis results in data mining. To make better decisions, 
a complete data set must be matched with a given decision tree model. This is gener-
ated during the data mining phase. However, it is difficult to find a complete data set 
at a specific site without artificial collection for the purpose of data analysis. To use 
the complete data set, partial data must be collected from naturally distributed sites.  
Table 3. Two distributed data for decision making 
The table of site A                                                              The table of site B 
 
SSN Age sex degree SSN Job salary 
412-35-2067 39 M M.A 
 
412-35-2067 salesman $4100 
535-27-1516 28 F B.A  355-27-1516 teacher $2800 
 
Table 3 presents an example of two simple datasets distributed at two physically 
different sites. The distributed decision making algorithm in an agent-mediator com-
munication mechanism is shown in Fig. 4 and the functions of the algorithm are  
described as follows:  
 
initializeAgent(): To initiate local agents associated with the local decision 
making processes. 
checkSearchAttr(): To decide whether an agent owns information of the 
searchable attribute in the gi ven decision tree traversal or 
not. 
traverseTree(): To traverse over the decision tree. 
buildTraversInfo(): To build the traversal information including the available 
search path of the decision tree during local decision 
making.

Distributed Data Mining System Based on Multi-agent Communication Mechanism 105 
 
loop
alt
Winning Agent : Agent Losing Agent : AgentMediator : Mediator
initializeAgent() initializeAgent()return done return done
checkS earchableAttr() checkS earchableAttr()
 [has Attribute=true] : travers eT ree()  [hasAttribute=fals e] : wait()
 [isLeafNode=false] : buildT ravers alInfo()
 [availableNode=true] : sendT raversInfo(info)
dis tribT ravers Info(info) setupS earchP ath(info)
return donereturn done
 [availableNode=false] : wait()
notifyMediator()
termina teAgent()
<<des troy>> terminateAgent()
<<des troy>>return done return done
 
Fig. 4. UML sequence diagram for distributed decision making 
sendTraversInfo(info): To send the traversal information to the mediator. 
distribTraversInfo(info): To distribute the information to the others. 
setupSearchPath(info): To set up a search path for a decision tree. 
notifyMediator(): To notify the mediator for termination. 
terminateAgent(): To terminate the agent. 
 
Fig 5 presents an example for a distributed decision making procedure. Two sites 
are assumed to be associated with the decision making process. In step 1, the value of 
the ‘age’ field in site A is selected and the given global decision tree is traversed by 
age value. In step 2, the value of the ‘sex’ field in site A is also selected, the decision 
tree is traversed by through the sex value and then information is sent to the other site 
through the mediator because there is no fiel d left for traversing on the tree. On the 
other hand, the information in site B is recorded in the same fashion as site A. In step 
3, a procedure similar to step 2 is followed. Finally, decision making is terminated 
when any leaf node on the decision tree is found.

106 S.G. Kim et al. 
 
Fig. 5. Distributed Decision Making Procedure with distributed datasets in Table 3 
4   System Architecture and Evaluation 
This section describes a distributed (agent based) data mining system integrated with 
a data modeling for information learning and a decision making for information  
prediction. The architecture of an agent based system consists of a web server, a me-
diator, and agents for successful distributed data modeling. The web server supports 
users with a web based interface through which they can access databases located at 
different sites and manipulate data mining facilities. The mediator coordinates the 
communication between several agents with se curity concerns such as authentication. 
Through communication with the other agents, each agent is located at each heteroge-
neous data site to achieve 1) coordinate d data modeling through the cooperation of 
local learning, or 2) coordinated decision-making through the cooperation of  
local decision-making. Both data modeling and decision making algorithms were 
implemented in C. The graphical user interface (GUI) for data mining process was 
developed to easily manipulate the given databases in a distributed way. The GUI  
(in Fig. 6) as well as the communication interface within the agent was implemented 
in Java. 
The Distributed Data Mining (DDM) component includes a number of Data Min-
ing (DM) Agents whose efforts are coordinated through a facilitator. One of the major 
functions of the facilitator is to collect information from various DM Agents and to 
broadcast the collected information to othe r Agents involved in the mining process. 
To this end, there is a certain amount of cost associated with the distributed mining 
process, namely that of the communication bandwidth. For very large datasets, the 
high cost of transferring information from one agent to another can become a major 
bottleneck in the data mining process.

Distributed Data Mining System Based on Multi-agent Communication Mechanism 107 
 
Fig. 6. Sample of GUI for the implemented distributed data mining system 
 
Fig. 7. Agents-based system overview for distributed data modeling and decision making

108 S.G. Kim et al. 
Fig. 7 presents an overview of the distributed data mining system which consists of 
1) agents for data modeling process in distributed environments, 2) agents for deci-
sion making in both distributed and mobile environments and 3) two mediators  
controlling both kinds of agents in different ways. The agents for data modeling are 
located in data repositories in which ther e are huge databases for their own special 
purpose. A distributed data mining can be achieved through participating agents’ 
communication via a mediator in order to provide knowledge information for further 
decision making modes in which agents can work on mobile devices as well as PCs 
connected with each other via on line. In this mode, each agent deal with short lines 
of data, instead of huge databases, which can be collected in a specialized way re-
quired during a traversal on the given decision tree for complete decision making. 
This system was evaluated over a test bed of the US census bureau statistical data-
set [5] collected in the 1990s. The dataset has been used for data analysis on compli-
cated data sources by many researchers [6, 7].  It is also appropriate to deploy several 
sub-datasets at different locations for this work. The experimentation with the dataset 
is for showing higher performance of the distributed system which can generate the 
exact same results of data analysis with the previous system considering only central-
ized data sources.  
For a comparison of the new system with the previous one, the dataset has been 
disjoined into two-four different databases which were deployed with the similar 
numbers of attributes in different local sites. The proposed distributed data mining 
method was evaluated under three experiments with different number of agents; with 
2 agents (Exp 2), 3 agents (Exp 3), and 4 agents (Exp 4). Their experimental results 
were compared to an experiment with a non-distributed data mining system (Exp 1). 
Entropy calculation and agent communication are critical in the non-distributed way 
and the distributed way, respectively. 
The experimental results (Table 4) show that the distributed version with more 
agents outperforms the version with fewer agents when the rule generation from large 
amount of database is not complicate with low communication overhead between 
agents and the mediator. The decision rule sets generated in all experiments are ex-
actly same since the proposed algorithm for distributed data mining uses all the avail-
able data located at different sites, without moving them into each other.  
Table 4. Results of four experimentations 
 Exp1 Exp2 Exp3 Exp4 
Entropy Calculation 3,550 1,923 1,169 761 
Agents Communication N/A 376 523 731 
Extra Time N/A 25 37 52 
Total Collapsed Time(Seconds) 3,550 2,324 1,729 1,544 
5   Conclusion and Future Work 
This work has been motivated from natural dataset separation within a decision tree 
classification algorithm, in which finding an attribute and its appropriate value to split

Distributed Data Mining System Based on Multi-agent Communication Mechanism 109 
a given dataset for sub-tree structure generation is a time consuming process. To deal 
with separated dataset with the modified classification algorithms is beneficial to the 
performance of data mining systems and information security between different hosts. 
This approach will be applied to predictive modeling in a distributed OLAP (online 
analytical processing) system which can prov ide 3D visualization functions to present 
the results of data analysis from distributed datasets. As a result of its application, the 
distributed data mining and the use of its based visualization technique will enable 
intuitive management for distributed databases to more end users in a broad range of 
fields. Also, if this work is to be developed to be commercialized in mobile markets, a 
new paradigm of mobile data mining based on this work can be applied to mobile 
devices with low computing power and wherein end users take individual information 
security issues into consideration. This a pproach would also be applied to new real 
world domains such as game [8] and human interaction [9] requiring distributed ways 
for data analysis. 
References 
1. Shen, Y., Shao, H., Li, Y.: Research on the Personalized Privacy Preserving Distributed 
Data Mining. In: 2009 Second International Conference on Future Information Technology 
and Management Engineering, pp. 436–439 (2009) 
2. Bueti, G., Congiusta, A., Talia, D.: Developing Distributed Data Mining Applications in the 
Knowledge Grid Framework. In: Daydé, M., Dongarra, J., Hernández, V., Palma, J.M.L.M. 
(eds.) VECPAR 2004. LNCS, vol. 3402, pp. 156–169. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
3. Ramos, R., Camacho, R.: Distributed Generative Data Mining. In: Perner, P. (ed.) ICDM 
2007. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 4597, pp. 307–317. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 
4. Aounallah, M., Quirion, S., Mineau, G.W.: Distributed Data Mining vs. Sampling Tech-
niques: A Comparison. In: Tawfik, A.Y., Goodwin, S.D. (eds.) Canadian AI 2004. LNCS 
(LNAI), vol. 3060, pp. 454–460. Springer, Heidelberg (2004) 
5. Data Mining Community’s Top Resource, http://www.kdnuggets.com 
6. Dwork, C., Nissim, K.: Privacy-Preserving Datamining on Vertically Partitioned Databases. 
In: Franklin, M. (ed.) CRYPTO 2004. LNCS, vol. 3152, pp. 528–544. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2004) 
7. Kim, W.Y., Lee, Y.K., Han, J.: CCMine: Efficient Mining of Confidence-Closed Correlated 
Patterns. In: Dai, H., Srikant, R., Zhang, C. (eds.) PAKDD 2004. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3056, 
pp. 569–579. Springer, Heidelberg (2004) 
8. Zhang, X., Cheung, W.K.: A Game Theoretic Approach to Active Distributed Data Mining. 
In: Proceedings of IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Intelligent Agent Tec hnol-
ogy, pp. 109–117. IEEE Press, New York (2007) 
9. Bayrak, C., Kolukisaoglu, H., Chiang, C.C.: Di-Learnn: Distributed Knowledge Discovery 
with Human Interaction. In: IEEE International Conference on SMC, vol. 4, pp. 3354–3361. 
IEEE Press, New York (2006)

Biologically Inspired Agent System Based
on Spiking Neural Network
Bart/suppresslomiejJ ´ozef Dzie´nkowski and Urszula Markowska-Kaczmar
Wroc/suppresslaw University of Technology
urszula.markowska-kaczmar@pwr.wroc.pl
Abstract. The paper presents an architecture of a biologically inspired
agent. Its physical body is described ﬁrst. The agent’s movement is di-
rectly controlled by Spiking Neural Network. To achieve this goal, the
network is trained by a genetic algorithm. The agents move in a 3D phys-
ical environment. Their main goal is to eﬀectively translocate themselves
using a virtual body structure and muscles. This approach is inspired by
a biological assumptions, where the neural network receives signals from
sensors and directly controls the muscles. The application of Spiking Neu-
ral Network needs a suitable signal encoding method, which is also de-
scribed. The system is ﬂexible and it allows to create agents with various
body structures and diﬀerent neural controllers. Experiments presented
in the paper refer to a simple snake-like creature. The eﬀectiveness of
controllers based on a st andard threshold network and the spiking one
are compared.
Keywords: pulsed neurons, spiking neural network, genetic algorithm,
3D environment, body structure, encoding method.
1 Introduction
Spiking NeuralN etworks (SNNs)[ 2], also known as Pulsed NeuralN etworks [1],
are a relatively new paradigm.W ith no doubt their idea ist h er e s ult of a better
understanding the processes in the biological brain. However there are still some
unanswered questionsa bout the e xact way how the brain ors ynapses work.
Nevertheless the spiking neuron model describes the neuron electrical potential
very precise makingt h emodeln o ntrivial. Fort hisr e a son SNNs are perceived as
too complex fora wide practical application.
The McCulloch-Pitts neuron relies on the neuron activity average.T hism e ans
that the input and output values used by the model represent the frequencyo f
generatingp ulses rather than as inglep ulse.I th a sb e en proved, that the brain
almost never has e nough time to measure averages over a t ime intervals [1].
Moreover as the time interval gets shorter, the estimate becomes less eﬃcient.
Pulsed neuron operates at a suﬃcient levelo fp r e cision tow ork with singles pikes.
Often used simpliﬁcationsd on ota llow to experience the real characteristics
of SNNs.M any previous works use separated spiking neurons instead ofa neural
network.F requently forr e cognition tasks there is only onec omputation run,
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 110–119, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Biologically Inspired Agent System Based on Spiking Neural Network 111
which meanst h a tneurons’ states are reset at the e nd ofar u n. This approach
makes ite a sier to apply ac odingb a s e don a neuron ﬁrings order [3], because
after a short time spikes become chaotic.
More advanced approach can be found in [4], where SNN isa dopted fora
mobilep a r tner robotc ontrol. A perceptual system oft h erobot isb uiltf roma
neuron structure.T he structure provides ani nformation about surroundings to
am otors ystem.
Another example isam e t hod ofc ontrollingab iped robot’sm ovement with
SNN in ap hysical simulation, which was proposed in [5]. However, here much
eﬀort was put to reduce the role oft h eneuraln etwork byi ntroducings imulation
simpliﬁcations.A lso the applied signal encoding is nots a tisfying.
Being inspired by the brain performance, the goalo ft his research ist o ﬁnd
the answer whether SNNsc an be successfully applied to the direct control ofa n
agent in an physical environment.T he most important assumption is that the
levelo fs impliﬁcations is reduced to the minimum.
Thisp a p e rcontainsad e s c ription of the agentc onstruction, network commu-
nication ande ncodingm e t hod.A tt h eend of the paper results will be presented.
2T h e A g e n t S y s t e m
To study eﬃciencyo fa n agentc ontrol based on the Spiking NeuralN etwork,
the Agent System –o ur research framework,w as designed.A n agentm odelsa
livingc r e a t u r e.I ts bodyi sb uiltf rom joined elements equipped with muscles.
The output of neuraln etworks unambiguously deﬁnes how the muscles ofa n
agenta r ep ropelled.T hat is why agents can haved iﬀerents h a p e sanda bilities.
The agents’ goali st o eﬀectively translocate themselves whilec ompletinga n
objective.T he system allowst o buildc r e a t u r e swith various structures.T he
examples are sho w ni nF ig.1 .T he platform enables methods to create the agent
structure, assignn euraln etwork model as its controller ands imulate an agent’s
movement in virtuall ife.I n addition the platform makes itp ossiblet o train the
network.
The agentc an be c onsidered at se verall evels.T hus, ap hysical body and
a neuraln etwork structure are separate issues.T he same looking agents can
use diﬀerent neuraln etwork models.T hese two issues are presented in the next
sections.
Fig. 1. Example agents: snake-like (i), hip and two legs (ii)

112 B.J. Dzie´ nkowski and U. Markowska-Kaczmar
Fig. 2. Example body structure element graph (i). Figure shows: root (ii), element (iii),
joint (iv).
3 Agent Body Elements
A bodyo fa n agent isb uiltf rom joined elements (Fig. 2). Collision surfaces are
assigned to these elements.T hey represent limb orc orpus.I n the current stage
of research only basicb locks are used – high detail ofab ody representation is
notap r iority. Similar approach has bee n applied in [6]. A ssumption that an
elementc an store pointer too n l yo ne joint iss u ﬃ cientt o construct a complex
agent’sb ody. To achievet his,i t is necessary to maintain hierarchical structure
ofb ody elementc onnections.F ore xamplec onsideringah u m an body, af oot is
boundt o an ankle, ac alft o ak nee andat h igh to ah ip-joint.T hus, the thigh
has no idea about the existence oft h eknee.
There is onep rivileged element.T he roote lementd oes nots tore information
about any jointa nd occupies the ﬁrst place in the hierarchy.
Joints allow to bendt wo elements in ar ange ofad e ﬁned minimal andm aximal
anglef ore a c haxis.T here are also restrictionsa bout the maximal force which
can be applied to the joint (orm ore precisely – the virtual muscle). Everyj o i nt
ise q uipped with severali nterfaces like receptors and virtual musclee ﬀectors.
They provide information about the anglea nda llow to control at orque.
There are two types of joints used:
– hinge –o nea xisb ending (i.e., knee, elbow).
– universalj o i nt – two axisb ending (i.e., wrist, hip-joint).
In the future, the set of jointt ypes can be extended with, fore xampleb all socket,
slider orp iston joint,i f necessary.
4 Neural Network Structure
In the research a spiking neuraln etwork isr e s ponsiblef ora n agentd irect con-
trol. There is no intermediate interpretation. The controller consists ofm any

Biologically Inspired Agent System Based on Spiking Neural Network 113
Fig. 3. Example signal ﬂow model – autonomous networks represented by hexagons.
Types of connections: direct muscle control (a), receiving a bending angle (b), receiving
an element complex data (c), communication between networks (d), receiving informa-
tion about the agent in the context of environment (e).
autonomous networks receivingp a r tial data,i nstead of oneh u g ehomogenous
network,w hich wouldp rocess all signals.I nF ig.3 an example ofas ignalﬂ o w
iss hown. The autonomous neuraln etworks are marked by hexagons. Each one
receives information about the agenta ndt h es u r roundings.F ors implec r e a t u r e s
theyo btain on their input an encoded information about an anglef rom joints
(Fig.3 b). Toprovide a body movementt h ey pass their output to a joint (Fig.3
a). Form ore complex agents information about the p osition andt h erotation
in the space oft h econtrolled agent is supplied to the network (Fig.3 c). It is
also possiblet o buildam ore sophisticated structure,w hich includes autonomous
networks communicating with each other (Fig.3 d). Finally ani nformation from
the outside of the agentc an be received (Fig.3 e).
It is obvious that the more complexi nformation isd elivered to the network,
the greater number ofc onnections is needed.T oavoidt h eg rowth ofc onnections
the networks are treated as hermetized objects designated to aﬀect only ap a r tof
the body. They receive only the data correlated to the elements that they aﬀect.
The signalﬂ o wi nthe neural controller isa s signed manually by ad e signer for
each agent.H ed e ﬁnes what kind of information will be given to the network
ande ven how many networks will be used.I t isp ossiblet o automatically adjust
connections duringat r ainingp rocess, but itd r a m a tically increases number of
connectionsf ore a c ha u tonomous network.A fter experiments with the system
wec an say that the manual approach isr isky, but generally canl ead to better
results.
4.1 Autonomous Network Model
Each autonomous neuraln etwork represents a common feed forward structure.
It isp r e s ented in Fig. 4.I tc onsists oft h r e elayers with each neuron fully con-
nected with all neurons in the next layer.T he role of the ﬁrst layer ist o scale
ands p r e a dani nput alongt h eh iddenl ayer.T hus, the hiddenl ayer receives

114 B.J. Dzie´ nkowski and U. Markowska-Kaczmar
Fig. 4. Neural network model with three layers: input layer (i), hidden layer (ii), output
layer (iii)
properly prepared andc omprehensibles ignal fors piking neurons.A fter the sig-
nali sp rocessed by the hiddenl ayer it is passed directly to the output layer.
The number of neurons in the hiddenl ayer ise q u al to the number of inputs.
By analogy, the number of neurons in the output layer ise q u al to the number of
outputs.T he number of inputs or outputs isr elated to the adopted signalﬂ o w
model andt h eencodingm e t hod.
The main diﬀerence to the classicalM ultilayered Perceptron (MLP) network
lies in the nature of neuronsa p plied in the hidden and output layer.P resented
model refers to the generic Spike Response Modeli n discrete-time with ﬁrst-
order recursived igital ﬁlters described in [1] (see Fig.5 ) .The neurons’o utput
isc alculated at intervals T.A timestep shouldb es e ts uitably to provide a suf-
ﬁcientc omputational accuracy. The period T depends on previous assumptions
andu s u ally ise q u al to1 ms.D igital ﬁlters use a relaxation factor r to model a
potential decayi n time:
r = exp(−T
τ ), (1)
where τ denotes how fast the potential will approach to zero. Finally, the mathe-
matical deﬁnition ofam e m b r ane state potential ui(n)o fa neuron i at a timestep
n isp r e s ented in eq. 2:
ui(n)= Ai(n)+ Bi(n), (2)
where Bi(n)i sa n accumulated potential fromp r e synaptic neuronsa tt h einput
and Ai(n) modelsad ynamict h r e s hold.I t ise xpressed in eq.3 :
Ai(n)= − [η0y(n)+ riuti(n− 1) +ϑ] , (3)
where η0 representar e f r a c toriness factor, y∈{ 1, 0} determines ano utput spike,
riuti(n−1) modelsar e f r a c toriness potential and ϑ isad e ﬁned statict h r e s hold.
Let us note that the refractoriness isa ni nhibitory potential triggered by as pike
and it decays in time.T he spike isg enerated when ui(n) > 0.

Biologically Inspired Agent System Based on Spiking Neural Network 115
Fig. 5. Neuron model in discrete-time with ﬁrst-order recursive digital ﬁlters [1]
The accumulated potential provided fromas e t ofp r e synaptic neurons j∈ Γi
connected to the neuron i isd e ﬁned in eq. 4:
Bi(n)=
∑
j∈Γi
[wijxij(n)+ rijufij (n− 1)] , (4)
where wij isac onnection weight, xij ∈{ 1, 0} represents ani nput signal and
rijufij (n− 1) denotes ani nput potential decay. It is worth noticing that the
input is prepared only fors pike signals.D epending on weights sign, the signal
will be e xhibitoryo r inhibitory. Relaxation factors andt h e weights model a
strength oft h econnectionsa ndt h esynapses signal processing.
4.2 Encoding Information for the Network
In this section the input and output encodingm e t hod will be presented.S N N
gives a sequence ofs pikes at the output – as pike train. The only information
which itc a r ries are the spike timings.T here are several approaches toi nterpret
the output [1]. It seems reasonablet o use a spike train as a direct stimulus for
eﬀectors.I n this work spikes simply inject a littlef orce to am u s cle.T he more
output signals, the more strength will be applied to am u s cle.
In practice there are two outputs fore a c hb endinga xis.T he torque direction
depends on which one oft h etwo outputs generated a spike at the time-slice.I f
the both outputs ﬁre at the same time,n o force to the joint isa p plied.
Encodingt h e input information isa littlem ore diﬃcult.U nfortunately we
cannotc onnect value of 1 to a network input just like that.F ora neuron this
wouldm e an that a spike isp rovided everyi nterval. There isa need to keep the
input potential at a constant level andd on ota llow to be recursively accumu-
lated, because itc an grow to ah u g esize.T hisc an be achieved by frequently
injectings m all parts ofp otentialo rd isabling input recursiveﬁ lters in the hid-
denl ayer.A dditionally, there is the assumption that only positive values can be
provided to the network.

116 B.J. Dzie´ nkowski and U. Markowska-Kaczmar
Let us consider a ﬂoat value encoding.T he value provided at the input can
cause only crossingt h et h r e s holda ndg eneratingas p ike.I t is necessary to use
many inputs to encode one ﬂoat,i far e a sonable levelo fp r e cision isr e q uired (for
examplet h evalue indicates an angle). The ﬂoat value can be normalized to ﬁt in
the range [0, 1]. Assumingt h elevelo fp r e cision N,w ec an divide the range into N
uniform subranges andu s eN separate inputs to encode this value.T he encoding
method isb a s e don connectingac onstant value to the input correspondingt o
the subrange in which the range ist h es c aled value.F ore xample if we need to
encode α = 66, α∈ [0, 90] with precision N = 4,w eu s e4 inputs and only
the 3rd input will receivea d ditives timulus fort hiss p e ciﬁc angle.T he proposed
encodingm e t hod leads to an enormous number of inputs, but appears to be the
most adequate.T he important issue ist o select an appropriate precision and
choose a suitabler ange.
5 Neural Network Training
Each neuraln etwork needs a training phase in order to apply itt o solveap r ob-
lem.D uringt his phase its parameters are adjusted step by step.V ery popular
approach ist o use a gradients u p e rvised methodt o ﬁnd optimaln euraln etwork
parameters.I no ur case, knowledge about required output isu nknown, so gra-
dientm e t hod isu s eless.T herefore, ag enetica lgorithm with the elitist modeli s
chosen to train the network,i .e. to ﬁnda ll parameters (weights and decays).
Duringg enetict r ainingt h e r eis only onep opulation. Itc onsists of agent’ sc on-
trollers oft h es a m etype.M ore precisely, each agent isr e p r e s ented by genotype
that encodes parametersofa ll autonomous networks.I nthe following description
ofg enetict r aining we will focus on the chromosome only, representing parame-
ters of one neuron, but its hould be emphasized that parameters ofa ll networks
are considered in thisc a s e.F or each agent independently as imulation isr un to
compute a ﬁtness function value.I n the experiments weh aveu s e dtwo types of
ﬁtness functi o ni norder to enforce a speciﬁc behavior of agents.T he ﬁrst one
hike ise xpressed by ar elativet r aveled distance,w hilet h es e cond, thrifty takes
into accounta lso the energy spentt o achievet hisd istance.
– hike := (current traveled distance) + (maximum traveled distance) / 2
– thrifty := (current traveled distance) / (consumed energy)
where the traveled distance isa n absolute distance between agenta ndt h es t a r t
point.
To evaluate a chromosome,i th a sto be decoded.A resulted neuraln etwork
isac ontroller ofa n agent.T he creature has a deﬁ ned period oft ime (usually
15s) to show what ith a slearned.A fter an evaluation ap roportional selection is
applied.
At the current stage only basicb e h aviors are taught.A cooperation ism ore
advanced problem and will be realized in the future.I tr e q uires some previously
achieved skillsf roma n agent.I nsuch case the population wouldc onsists ofm any
types of agents.

Biologically Inspired Agent System Based on Spiking Neural Network 117
Fig. 6. Crossover operators: uniform crossover (i), two-point crossover (ii)
A chromosome isd e ﬁned at the levelo fa neuron. The genotype ofa neuron i
containsar e f r a c toriness factor ηi, at h r e s hold ϑi, a refractoriness decay τi1, an
input weight wip anda ni nput decay τip,w here p ist h enumber ofa ni nput.T he
input weight wip and the decay τip are compoundg enes, because they aﬀect one
connection.
There are three genetic operators deﬁned: am u t a tion, at wo-pointc rossover
anda n uniform crossover.T he mutation uses two percentage parameters ofa
genem odiﬁcation – separate forf a c tors (ηi, ϑi, wip) and decays (τi, τip). The
crossover operatorc an be applied only between two related chromosomes.
6 Experimental Study
The aim oft h eexperiments performed in the early stage of our research was to
check whether the controller based on spiking neuraln etwork isa blet o cause
ap roper behavior ofa n agent.W ef ocused on as imples nake-like agents hown
in Fig. 7. Onea u tonomous spiking network produces ano utput,w hich deﬁnes
the change of one joint.T he network receives as inputs information about the
angles of the previous joint, the following jointa ndﬁ nally the joint which it is
responsiblef or.I ts simplicity gives a clear glance at the main features of SNNs.
Fig. 7. Signal ﬂow for snake-like agent
1 τ is the component of the relaxation factor (see eq. 1); τip refers to the connection,
τi to the comparator part of a neuron.

118 B.J. Dzie´ nkowski and U. Markowska-Kaczmar
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
hike ﬁtness
ages
SNNs – elitist training
best ﬁtness
◦
◦ ◦
◦◦
◦ ◦
◦ ◦
◦◦ ◦ ◦◦◦◦◦ ◦◦◦◦◦
Fig. 8. Example of SNNs training using two-point crossover with prob. =0.5, mutation
prob. =0.1, weight percent factor =0.1 and decay percent factor =0.05.
The age ntu s e sinformation only about its own body. As itc a n be noticed,
the neuraln etworks obtain encoded bendinga ngles.D urings imulation weh ave
observed whether they are ablet o control theirm u s clee ﬀectors eﬀectively. The
physical environment isb a s e don ODE (OpenD y namics Engine). The simulation
isb eingu p d a t e d50 times per second.T he same update frequencyi sa lso applied
to the neuraln etwork computation.
It was assumed that a successfully trained agent isa blet o skilfully andq uickly
roll (at least during the ﬁrst 15 seconds). Sometimes its movement was chaotic,
but eﬀective.T he ﬁtness oft h eb e s tobserved SNN agent hike ﬁtness iss hown in
Fig. 8.I ts ﬁtness value has grown relatively quick till 10 000 generations.T hen
its growth was smaller, but even at the end ofs imulation rose.
In the seconde xperiment wet ried to compare obtained results with the be-
havior ofa n agentc ontrolled by the network with the same structure as the
onep r e s ented above, but instead ofs piking neuron, simple perceptron with the
unipolar thresholdf unction was used.W ec all itt h eclassical network.T he com-
parison was a diﬃcultt a s k, because the networks in fact are completely diﬀerent
ande ven genetica lgorithm parameters havead iﬀerent inﬂuence on each net-
work type.F urthermore, aﬁ nal result ofat r aining is very dependent on initially
selected network parameters. Randomly applied weights and decaysh aveac r u-
ciali n ﬂuence on at r aining.T he process havet o be repeated many times before
any conclusionsc an be taken. That is why each trainingp rocess was repeated
10 times.
Usually classicaln etworks are trained faster, because they have less param-
eters to adjust.H o wever, the real diﬀerence can be seen by comparison oft wo
trained agents ability. Even though they havet h es a m ehike ﬁtness≈4,i n most
cases at the e nd of the deﬁned 15 second, the SNN agents till rolls whilet h e
agentb a s e don the classical network isd ying in agony. The SNN agenta p p e a r s

Biologically Inspired Agent System Based on Spiking Neural Network 119
to be better adapted f orar a ndome vents,w hile the age ntc ontrolled by the
classical network easily gets into a state ofp owerlessness andﬁ nally freezes.
7C o n c l u s i o n
This work explores new capabilities of agentc ontrollers based on SNNs.T he
project isa tt h ee a rly state ands ome issues are faced, but when the training
process is successful the qualityo fa n agentm ovement isd iscernible.A controller
based on SNNss e e m sto havea natural ability too vercome obstacles in the
environment.I ts behavior is notr igidly tailored to the trainingc onditions, hence
it ism ore ﬂexible.S N Nsa r emore powerful fort hisp roblem.
After these ﬁrst successfu l experiments with agents based on spiking neural
network, the designed system architecture isr e a dy for new challenges.I no r-
der to enable agentc ooperation an exchange ofs ignalsb e tween agents can be
performed.N ext stages of the project shouldr e s ult in more sophisticated and
objective-aimed agentm odels.
References
1. Maass, W., Bishop, C.M. (eds.): Pulsed Neural Networks. MIT Press, Cambridge
(1999)
2. Bothe, S.M.: Spiking Neural Networks. Thesis, Centre for Computer Science and
Mathematics, Leiden (2003)
3. Loiselle, S., Rouat, J., Pressnitzer, D.: Exploration of Rank Order Coding with
Spiking Neural Networks for Speech Recognition. In: Proceedings of International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks 2005, Montreal, vol. 4, pp. 2076–2080 (2005)
4. Masuta, H., Kubota, N.: The perception for partner robot using spiking neu-
ral networks in dynamic environment. In: SICE Annual Conference 2008, Tokyo,
pp. 2001–2006 (2008)
5. Wiklendt, L., Chalup, S.K., Seron, M.: Quadratic Leaky Integrate-and-Fire Neu-
ral Network tuned with an Evolution-Strategy for a Simulated 3D Biped Walk-
ing Controller. In: Eighth International Conference on Hybrid Intelligent Systems,
Barcelona, pp. 144–149 (2008)
6. Sims, K.: Evolving Virtual Creatures. In: Proceedings of the 21st annual conference
on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, New York, pp. 15–22 (1994)

Cooperative Optimization in Cellular
Automata - Based Multiagent Systems with
Spatio-temporally Generalized Prisoner’s
Dilemma Model
MichalS eredynski, Romuald Kotowski, and Wojciech M¸aka
Polish-Japanese Institute of Information Technology
Koszykowa 86, 02-008 Warsaw, Poland
{michal.seredynski,rkotow,wmaka}@pjwstk.edu.pl
Abstract. A multiagent system operating in the two-dimensional cellu-
lar automata (CA) space is considered. Each cell of CA is treated as an
agent taking part in Spatio-temporally Generalized Prisoner’s Dilemma
(STGPD) game. Each agent currently uses one of the following strate-
gies: always defect (all D), always cooperate (all C) or k-D denoting
a wiling to cooperate until a number of defecting neighbors is less or
equal to k. Periodically agents update their current actions in order to
maximize their own proﬁt. We are interested in the phenomena of possi-
bly emerging global cooperation of CA-based agents of STGPD model.
Our study is motivated by a potential application of presented model for
organization of mobile ad hoc networks. We study the model under dif-
ferent starting settings of the model parameters and observe conditions
of emerging a global cooperation between agents. We discover a number
of perspective regions of the game with diﬀerent types and patterns of
cooperation.
1 Introduction
New emergingc omputer-communication technologies like mobilea dh oc net-
works, sensor networks org rids ystems are fu lly decentralized systems.T hey
contain ar elatively large number of iteratingu nits,w hich are ablet o take local
decisions inﬂuencingp e r formance measures of nodes in their neighborhoods and
this way greatly inﬂuencingap e r formance ofa wholes ystem.A typical example
ofs u c hat e c hnology are mobilea dh oc networks (MANET) [5].
MANETi sac ollection ofm obile nodes running on their own batteries and
connected byw ireless links. Each node can act as a s ource ofp a c k e t s,w hich
shouldb ed elivered viar outingm e c h anism to ad e s tination node. Each node can
act also as a router performingp a c k e tforwarding when the node is on ar oute be-
tween as ource andad e s tination. Sendingp a c k e t sby source nodes orf orwarding
them by router nodes isa s sociated with power consumption of batteries.D elivery
packets to ad e s tination isp ossible only wheni ntermediate nodes,n ot interested
directly in the deliveryo f not own packets,w ish to cooperate despite the loose
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 120–129, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Cooperative Optimization in CA - Based Multiagent Systems 121
oft h eir own batteries energy. Lookingf ors t a blec ooperation polices in MANET
is currently open research issue, see, e.g.[ 3 ] .
Prisoner Dilemma (PD), a game-theoreticm odel proposed initially as the 2-
person game to study the phenomena ofs elﬁshness andc ooperation in human
society has become a useful tool to study behavior ofa r tiﬁcial complex systems
like MANET. It isk nown [1] that TiT FoR TaT (TFT) strategyi n the 2-person
PD isar obust player strategyl eadingt o cooperation ofp layers, andt hiss t r a t e gy
couldb ed iscovered by evolutionary process.T he modelw as nexte xtended to
the N-person PD game,w here each player plays with all his opponent, but it
was shown that the cooperation strategyl ike TFT can emerge only when the
number ofp layers iss m all. Recently proposed spatialv ariants of PD much better
ﬁt to describe real situations like these in MANET. In thisp a p e rwe will focus
on STGPD model[ 9 , 6 ] ,which we will study from the perspective ofa p plication
as cooperation enforcements ystem in ad hoc networks.
The paper is organized as follows.I nthe next section we overview main results
concerned the cooperation issues in ad hoc networks and variants of PD model.
Section 3 presents details oft h eSTGPD model and Section 4s howsr e s ults of
experimental studyo ft h emodel. Last section containsc onclusions.
2 Ad-hoc Mobile Networks and Cooperation Issues:
Related Works
To solve the problem ofs elﬁsh behavior of nodes in MANET, diﬀerentm e c h a-
nisms ofc ooperation enforcements ystems haveb e en proposed recently.
In pricing-based approach a modelo ft h ewholes ystem isb uiltb y stressing on
the economic issues.A n example ofs u c han approach ist h eNUGLETS model.
The MANETi sc onsidered as a market with virtual money[ 3 ]and nodes are
forced to cooperate through earningt h evirtual money.
In reputation-based approach ani nteraction betweenn odes is often based on
diﬀerent variants ofac lassicalP D model. Nodes take decisionst o cooperate or
notb y collecting information about neighbors reputation (see, e.g. CORE model
[7]), theyi solate misbehaving nodes fromt h e network (CONFIDANT model
[2], attempt to use information about classiﬁcation of other nodes according
to theirp ower constrains ore volves t r a t e gies ofb e h avioru singe volutionary
mechanisms [10].
In recent years onec ano bservea p p e a ring newv ariants of PD which seem to
be more suitablet o model the mechanisms ofc ooperation in distributed systems
like MANET. In contrast to the classical N-person PD model, Nowak and May
[9] proposed a spatial modelo f N-person PD, in which each player interacts only
with his neighbors.
Recentp a p e r[6] extends the Nowak and May model called STGPD byi ntro-
ducings p a tial strategies,w hich take decisionsa bout a new player action on the
base not only opponentp a s ta c tions but a lsoo n the base of neighborp layers
conﬁgurations ofa c tions.S uch an approach iss imilar too neu s e din totalistic
CA[ 1 1 ],andt h emodel can be considered as the second order CA, because CA

122 M. Seredynski, R. Kotowski, and W. M¸ aka
Table 1. The payoﬀ function used in STGPD
other player
CD
C
 10
player
D
 b 0
cellsc orrespondingt o players (agent) can change theirr ules (strategies) during
evolvingC A. The proposed model seems to be very promisingf orap otential
application fore nforcementc ooperation in ad hoc networks, therefore it will be
as u bject of the studyi n thisp a p e r.
3 The Spatio-temporal Generalized Prisoner’s Dilemma
The spatial modelo f PD isb uilt [9] on 2-D CA space consisting of n1∗ n2 cells,
called also players or agents.P layers will take part in iterated PD game,w hich
will consists of T single games, and it is assumed that the value of T is not
known fort h eplayers.
Consideringt hism odel fromC A perspective wec an point out its main fea-
tures. Each cell has a neighborhood ofr a dius r.W e will assume Moore neighbor-
hood with r =1 consisting of8a d jacentc ells (except oft h eborder cells which
have reduced Moore neighborhood)o r Moore neghborhood with r = 2 with 24
cells.A tt ime t =0 each cell will be in a state D (Defect)o r C (Cooperate).
All cells will evolve in discrete moments oft ime until T iterations are reached,
changings imultaneously their states acc ordingt o rules assigned to them.W e
will assume existing 3 rules,w hich can be assigned to cells: all D (alwaysd e-
fect), all C (alwaysc ooperate), and k−D (cooperate until a number of defecting
neighbors is less ore q u al to k).
The rule k− D called also as p a tial strategy has been proposed recently by
Katsumata and Ishida in [6]. I tm e anst h a tap layer will tolerate the defeat
maximum of k his neighbors, still answeringb y action (cell state) C in the
nextm oment oft ime.H e will select action D ifm ore than k players in the
neighborhood defeated.
The strategy k− D can be considered as a generalized TFT strategy: when
k =0 then the spatial strategy becomes TFT strategy saying that the p layer
respond is D ifa t least onep layer in the neighborhood defeated in the previous
moment oft ime, andh isr e s pond is C ifa ll neighbors played action C.T he
strategy can be also considered as a totalistict ype ofC A rules,w here a decision
concerningt h enextc ell state depends on a number of defecting (cooperating)
neighboringc ells, but not on locations oft h e s ec ells.
Whilec ellsc h ange their states (select theira c tions) at each discrete moment
oft ime,i t is assumed that cellsc h ange also theirr ules after q time steps.T hey
will do that on the base oft h eirs cores, comparingt h e mwith scores gained by
their neighbors duringt h ep e riod q.F ort his purpose it isa s s u m e dt h a ta te a c h

Cooperative Optimization in CA - Based Multiagent Systems 123
discrete moment oft ime, each cell will playi ndependently PD games with its
neighbors (i.e.i n robin-roundm ode, totally 8 games for r =1 and 24 games for
r = 2) collectingt his way scores, by summings cores froms ingle games.T able 1
showsp ayoﬀ function used in games.
Players-cellsu s evalues oft h eir states as actions.A player correspondingt o a
given cell, presentingh isa c tion C to his opponent obtainsp ayoﬀ equal to1 ,i f
his opponenta lso presents the action C, and receives 0i n the other case.I ft h e
player presents the action D, he receives payoﬀ equal to b (1 <b< 2)w hen the
opponentp r e s ents the action C, and receives 0i no ther case.
The algorithm ofc h angingr ules ist u rno n after each q iterated games. Each
player compares hist otal score obtained during last q games with scores ofa ll his
neighbors.I n the result oft hisc omparison the player adopts a rule,w hich pro-
vided the best score in the neighborhood,i ncludingh imself.T he next q iterated
games are played with these new rules.
Onec an see that the process of optimization ofb e h avior ofp layers represented
by CA cells isp e r formed by periodical changingb y cells oft h eirr ules,w hat is
nott ypical forC A models. Considered in the paper CA modelw ith a possibility
of adaptation ofr ules isc alled the second order CA.
4 Experimental Results
In the conducted experiments a cellular space consisting of2 500 cells was used
with parameters n1 = n2 = n = 50. V alues C and D of initial cells’ states
were randomly assigned to cells with probability0 . 5 .A lso3 rules were randomly
distributed between cells with probability equal to 0.33. Twosets ofe xperiments
haveb e en conducted: forC Aw ith a radius equal to r =1 andC Aw ith r = 2.
The experiments were performed fora ll combinations of values of b (1.0 <b< 2.0
with step equal to0 . 1 )anda ll values of k (k =0 ..8f or n =1 and k =0 ..24 for
n = 2).
The performance oft h es ystem was measured b y a number of parameters,
such as freque ncyo fc ooperatingc ells (a), frequencies oft h es t r a t e gies all D,
all C and k-D (b), andas p a tial dynamic ofs t r a t e gies was alsoo bserved
(c). In singlee xperiments conducted with givenv alues of parameters b and k,
the initially assigned rules to cells were changed after each iteration, i.e.i t was
assumed that q =1 .T he iterated STGPD was observed during T = 1000 time
steps (iterations).
4.1 Experiment #1: CA with r =1
The analysis ofa ll experimental data obtained for STGPD modelw ith r =1
shows that there e xists a number ofr e gionsd e ﬁned byv alues of parameters b
and k with diﬀerentt ypes ofb e h avior.F or values of 1.0 <b< 1.6 and 0≤ k< 4
the sys t e ma f t e ras m all number of iterationsb e comes ”frozen”(nots howinga ny
dynamics)w ith high notc h anging values off r e q u encyo fc ooperatingc ells which
are in the range [0.8, 1.0], and notc h anging values ofs t r a t e gies’ frequencies (not

124 M. Seredynski, R. Kotowski, and W. M¸ aka
shown in the paper). Startingf romt h evalue of b =1 .6o nec ano bserves everal
types ofd ynamics in the model.
Fort h evalue b =1 .6 and k =0 the system also quickly achieves (see,F ig.1 a)
statistical stabilityw ith the value off r e q u encyo fc ooperatingc ells (pinkc olor)
oscillatinga round 0.9. It isar e s ult ofs ome dynamic oft ightly synchronized
changes oft wo strategies: allC (green color) and k− D (blue color). Fig.1 b
showst h ecorrespondingd istribution ofs t r a t e gies in the cellular space att = 500.
Att his iteration the dominatings t r a t e gyi s allC (green color) andt h es e cond
frequently used strategyi s k−D (blue color), anda f t e rsome number of iterations
the situation changes in opposite direction. Some regions ofc ellular space are
occupied by small number of allD strategy( red color). The number ofc ells
with thiss t r a t e gyi ss t a blea nd oscillates in the same wayl ike the frequencyo f
cooperatingc ells.
When k =3 andt h evalue of b remainst h es a m e, the system showsa new
dynamicp r e s ented in Fig.1 c.T he frequencyo fc ooperatingc ells oscillates in
the range [0.51, 0.94]. It ist h er e s ult ofc h anges off r e q u encies oft h es t r a t e gies
allC and k− D,w hich in tightly synchronized way change aroundt h e value
close to0 . 5 ,whilet h enumber ofc ells with the strategy allD is reduced to0 .
The distribution ofs t r a t e gies allC and k− D in the cellular space at t = 500 is
sho w ni nF ig.1 d, andt hisd istribution has a character of labirynt.
When k is increased to 4 (see,F ig.1 e) the dynamic oft h esystem isr eoriented
in such a way that the global cooperation emerges after nearly 800 iterations,
with the freque ncyo fc ooperatingc ellse q u al to1 , andt h ed ominatingr ule
becomes allC.A gain it is visibleac lose symmetricd e p endence between allC
and k− D strategies with increasingf r e q u encyo f allC strategy and decreasing
frequencyo f k− D strategy. Fig.1 fs howst h edistribution ofs t r a t e gies in the
cellular space at t = 500. Only allC and k− D strategies create the CA space
population. Onec an see the decreas ingp rocess of labirynt phase,w here after
about 800 iterationsa ll cells will use the rule allC.
Fig. 2s hows what happens with the dynamic oft h esystem when k remains
to be equal to 4 but the value of b is increased andc h anges in the range [1.7 -
1.9]. Onec an see another type ofd ynamics characterized by diﬀerent patterns
of oscillatingf r e q u encyo fc ooperatingc ellsa roundt h e value of 0.5 (see,F ig.
2a,c,e). Dominated ruleb e comes the rule k− D,w hich fort h evalues of b equal
to1 .7a nd 1.8a c hieves the frequency 1.0 in the iteration close to 800. Further
increasingt his value of b results in decreasing the frequencyo ft h er ule k− D,
which still isad ominatingr ule.T he newi n thisd ynamics are s ynchronized
dependance andc h anges off r e q u encyv alues ofr ules k−D (blue color) and allD
(red color), whilet h eobserved dependence in Fig.1w as between rules k− D
and allC.F igs. 2b,d,fs howsd istribution oft h es t r a t e gies in the cellular space
at t = 500.
Increasingt h e value of k results in behavior which depends on the value
of b andc a n be c lassiﬁed intoo n e oft wo classes.F or values of k =6 , 7, 8
and b =1 .7, 1.8, 1.9 the behavior iss imilar to those presented in Fig. 2.F or

Cooperative Optimization in CA - Based Multiagent Systems 125
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 0, b = 1.6
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
a) b)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 3, b = 1.6
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
c) d)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 4, b = 1.6
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
e) f)
Fig. 1. Evolving SGPD for r =1a n d b =1 .6: k = 0 (a), strategies distribution at
t = 500 (b), k = 3 (c), strategies distribution at t = 500 (d), k = 4 (e), strategies
distribution at t = 500 (f)

126 M. Seredynski, R. Kotowski, and W. M¸ aka
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 4, b = 1.7
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
a) b)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 4, b = 1.8
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
c) d)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 4, b = 1.9
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
e) f)
Fig. 2. Evolving SGPD for r =1a n d k =4: b =1 .7 (a), strategies distribution at
t = 500 (b), b=1 .8 (c), strategies distribution at t = 500 (d), b =1 .9 (e), strategies
distribution at t = 500 (f)

Cooperative Optimization in CA - Based Multiagent Systems 127
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 9, b = 1.4
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
a) b)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 16, b = 1.7
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
c) d)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
frequency
iteration
n x n = 2500 cells, k = 23, b = 1.9
cooperating cells
k-D strategy
All-D strategy
All-C strategy
e) f)
Fig. 3. Evolving SGPD for r =2 : k =9 , b =1 .4 (a), strategies distribution at t = 500
(b), k = 16, b =1 .7 (c), strategies distribution at t = 500 (d), k = 23, b =1 .9( e ) ,
strategies distribution at t = 500 (f)

128 M. Seredynski, R. Kotowski, and W. M¸ aka
remainingc ombinations of parameters k and b the system becomes ”frozen” or
near ”frozen” with the frequencyo fc ooperatingc ellsc lose to1 .
4.2 Experiment #2: CA with r =2
The analysis ofe xperimental data obtained forC Aw ith r = 2,w hich are much
larger than fort h ec a s ewith r =1 enables to classify the game behavior into
few classes, ands ome oft h e ma r es hown in Fig.3 .T he common characteristic of
all behaviors fora ll combinations of k and b parameters (except the case when
k = 24)i s oscillation of the freque ncyo fa number ofc ooperatingc ells,w ith
the periode q u al to1 , between two values,w hich depend on particular values
of k and b.T he distance between these two values depends on particular values
ofap a ir k and b, ands imilar patternsc an be observed ford iﬀerent values of
k anda s sociated with ita value of b.W hen k is increased these t wo values
become lower, andﬁ nally for k = 24 the system becomes to be ”frozen” and no
cooperation is observed.
Fors m all values of k, e.g. k = 2a nd b =1 .5( n ots hown in the paper) the
value of the frequencyo fa number ofc ooperatingc ells oscillates between two
values [0.6364,0 . 6460] and these are the highest values fort his value of k.F or
k = 2a nd b =1 .3o nec ano bservet h eoscillation between two values [0.5400,
0.7708], which create the highest range of oscillation fort his value of k.A l lcells
use k− D strategy. Thisk ind ofb e h aviorc an be observed when the value of k
is increased.
When k =9 and b =1 .1 the frequencyo fa number ofc ooperatingc ells
oscillates between two values [0.4144, 0.6096] - the shorter range of oscillation
fort his value of k.F or k =9 and b =1 .4t h e oscillation isb e tweenv alues
[0.1128,0 .8884]( see,F ig.3 a)- the wider oscillation range fort his value of k.
The highly dominatings t r a t e gyi s k− D with the frequencyo scillatingb e tween
values [0.9876, 0.9900]. Small amount ofc ells supports allC strategy andt h e s e
cells occupy contiguous space(see,F ig.3 b - green color,i teration 500),ands ingle
cells support allD strategy( red color).
Fig.3 cs howsb e h avior oft h emodel for k =1 6 and b =1 .7.T he number of
cooperatingc ells oscillates between two values [0.3000, 0.5760] andt h e s evalues
become lower with increasingt h evalue of k.S till dominatings t r a t e gyi s k− D
and Fig.3 ds howst h edistribution ofs t r a t e gies between cells.
When k reaches the value 23, the frequencyo fa number ofc ooperatingc ells
oscillates between two values [0.2472,0 .2752]- the shorter range of oscillation
fort his value of k (see,F ig.3 e). Despite a relatively large value of k about 25%
cellsa r ea blet o cooperate due to the dominatings t r a t e gy k−D,w hich tolerates
defecting of neighboringc ells. Onec ann otice also( see,F ig.3 f) that the strategy
allC isq uite competitive in these conditions.
5 Conclusions
In thisp a p e rweh aves t u died self-organized abilities of Spatio-temporally Gen-
eralized Prisoner’s Dilemma modeli nterpreted as the sec ond order CA. Each

Cooperative Optimization in CA - Based Multiagent Systems 129
CA cell couldu s eone of 3 rules: all D, all C and k− D and duringe volvingC A
cellsc ouldc h ange theirr ules usingt h ecompetition mechanism based on selec-
tion of the best performingr ules in the neighborhood in gettings cores deﬁned
byP risoner Dilemma modelo f interaction between cell-players. Our studyw as
motivated by considering STGPD model as a potential mechanism ofc oopera-
tion enforcement in ad hoc networks.F ort hisr e a son wee valuated behavior of
STGPD by frequencyo fc ooperatingp layers,w hich depicts the degree oft h e
global cooperation behavior in the system.
Weh avef oundt h a tdiﬀerenta nds ometimes complex dynamics ofb e h avior
ofp layers in the model can be observed.T he type of the behaviord e p ends on
the size ofC An eighborhooda nd k and b parameters.W eh aves hown that for
speciﬁc parameters oft h em odel ag lobal cooperation behavior oft h es ystem
can emerge.S ome oft h e s er e gions oft h emodel parameters which provide an
adaptiveb e h avior oft h e wholes ystem wec onsider as very promisingf ort h e
research concerningm e c h anisms ofc ooperation enforcement in ad hoc networks.
References
1. Axelrod, R.: The Evolution of Strategies in the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma.
In: Genetic Algorithms and Simulated Annealing, Pitmann, pp. 31–41 (1987)
2. Buchegger, S., Le Boudec, J.-Y.: Performance analysis of the conﬁdant protocol.
In: Proceedings of MobiHoc, pp. 226–236 (2002)
3. Buttyan, L., Hubaux, J.P.: Stimulating Cooperation in Self-Organizing Mobile Ad
Hoc Networks. ACM Journal for Mobile Networks (2002)
4. Howley, E., O’Riordan, C.: The Emergence of Cooperation among Agents using
Simple Fixed Bias Tagging. In: Proceedings of Congress on Evolutionary Compu-
tation 2005, pp. 1011–1016 (2005)
5. Ilyas, M. (ed.): Mobile Computing Handbook. Auerbach Publications (2005)
6. Katsumata, Y., Ishida, Y.: On a Membrane Formation in a Spatio-temporally Gen-
eralized Prisoner’s Dilemma. In: Umeo, H., Morishita, S., Nishinari, K., Komat-
suzaki, T., Bandini, S. (eds.) ACRI 2008. LNCS, vol. 5191, pp. 60–66. Springer,
Heidelberg (2008)
7. Michiardi, P., Molva, R.: CORE: a Collaborative Reputation Mechanism to Enforce
Node Cooperation in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. In: Proceedings of the 6th IFIP
Conference on Security, Communications, and Multimedia, CMS (2002)
8. Namikawa, N., Ishibuchi, H.: Evolution of iterated prisoner’s dilemma game strate-
gies in structured demes under random pairing in game playing. IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation 9(6), 552–561 (2005)
9. Nowak, M.A., May, R.M.: The spatial dilemmas of evolution. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos 3,
35–78 (1993)
10. Srinivasan, V., Nuggehalli, P., Chiasserini, C.F., Rao, R.R.: Cooperation in wireless
ad hoc networks. In: Proceedings of INFOCOM, vol. 2, pp. 808–817. IEEE, Los
Alamitos (2003)
11. Wolfram, S.: A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media, Inc., Champaign (2002)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 130–139, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm  
for Data Reduction 
Ireneusz Czarnowski and Piotr Jędrzejowicz 
Department of Information Systems, Gdynia Maritime University  
Morska 83, 81-225 Gdynia, Poland 
{irek,pj}@am.gdynia.pl 
Abstract. Data reduction in the supervised machine learning aims at deciding 
which features and instances from the training set should be retained for further 
use during the learning process. Data reduction can result in increased capabili-
ties and generalization properties of the learning model and shorter learning 
process time. It can also help in scalin g up to a large data sources. This paper 
proposes an approach based on a combination of the simulated annealing tech-
nique and the multi-agent architecture designed for solving the data reduction 
problem. The paper includes the overview of the proposed approach and shows 
the computational experiment results. Experiment has shown that the proposed 
agent-based simulated annealing outperforms the traditional simulated anneal-
ing approach when solving the data reduction problem.  
1   Introduction 
Learning from examples remains the most important paradigm of the machine learn-
ing. Learning from examples is understood as the process of finding a model (or  
function) that describes and distinguishes data classes or concepts, for the purpose of 
being able to use the model to predict the class of objects whose class labels are un-
known [ 8]. The process of finding a classification model is also called learning process 
or learning classifier and the final model is, in short, called the classifier. Learning 
classifiers is also considered as a basic task in many application areas, including, for 
example, data mining, pattern recognition and computer vision. 
Research in the field of machine learning resulted in development of numerous 
approaches and algorithms for classificatio n problems. One of the recent focuses of 
such research includes methods of selecting relevant information, by data reduction, 
and presenting the reduced dataset to a machine learning algorithm [  12]. It is obvious 
that removing some instances from the training set reduces time and memory  
complexity of the learning process [ 18].  
Data reduction can be achieved by selection of instances, by selection of attrib-
utes/features or by simultaneous reduction in both dimensions [  16]. Since the instance 
selection and feature selection are known to belong to the NP-hard problem class 
[ 9, 11], none of the approaches proposed so far can not be considered as a superior nor 
guaranteeing satisfactory results in terms of the learning error reduction or increased 
efficiency of the learning process. Hence, searching for robust and efficient ap-
proaches to data reduction is still an open field of research.

An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Data Reduction 131 
This paper focuses on data reduction through simultaneous instance and feature 
selection. The main contribution of the paper is proposing and evaluating through 
computational experiment a combination of the simulated annealing algorithm with 
the agent-based population algorithm. The proposed approach assumes that optimi-
zation procedures of the population-based algorithm are implemented as agents 
within an asynchronous team of agents. The proposed approach is compared with an 
implementation of the traditional simulated annealing algorithm to data reduction. 
To validate the approach, a number of computational experiment runs have been 
carried out. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains the formulation of the data 
reduction problem. Section 3 gives some details on simulated annealing algorithm and 
agent-based population algorithm. Section 4 explains main features of the proposed 
implementation of the agent-based simulated annealing algorithm. Section 5 provides 
details on the computational experiment setup and discusses its results. Finally, the 
last section contains conclusions and suggestions for future research. 
2   Data Reduction Problem 
The problem of learning from data can be formulated as follows: Given a data set D, a 
set of hypothesis H, a performance criterion P, the learning algorithm L outputs a 
hypothesis h∈H that optimizes P. The data D consists of N training examples, also 
called instances. Each example is described by a set A of n features. The goal of learn-
ing is to produce a hypothesis that optimizes the performance criterion. In the pattern 
classification application, h is a classifier that has been induced based on the training 
set D.  
The learning process can be reinforced by data preprocessing of which data reduc-
tion is an important element. The data reduction process aims at finding patterns or 
regularities within certain features, allowing to induce the so called prototypes or 
reference vectors. The ultimate goal of the data reduction is to reduce the size of train-
ing dataset without losing extractable information. A lot of research work confirms 
that data reduction through instance or feature or instance and feature selection can 
play a pivotal role in building robust learning models [ 5,  12,  13,  14,  16,  18]. 
It can be stipulated that the data reductio n should be considered as the problem of 
finding an optimal subset of prototypes. In the formal manner the problem of data 
reduction can be formulated as follows: Given a learning algorithm L, and dataset D 
with features described by feature set A, an optimal prototype dataset, Sopt, is a subset 
of the dataset D, where each example is described by set of A’⊂A, such that the per-
formance criterion of the learning algorithm L is maximized. Commonly used per-
formance criteria include: accuracy of classification, complexity of the hypothesis, 
classification cost or classification error. 
With respect to learning from data, when data reduction process is carried out, the 
task of learner L is to output the hypothesis h∈H that optimizes performance criterion 
P using data set S which is a subset of the set D, such that S<D (ideally S=Sopt), where 
each example x∈S is described by a set A’ of m features, where m<n.

132 I. Czarnowski and P. J ędrzejowicz 
3   Simulated Annealing and Agent-Based Population Learning 
Algorithm for Data Reduction 
Since data reduction belongs to the class of computationally difficult combinatorial 
optimization problems, one may try to apply a selected metaheuristic like, for exam-
ple, simulated annealing or agent-based population learning algorithm.  
3.1   Simulated Annealing 
The idea of using simulated annealing (SA) has been proposed by Kirkpatrick et al. 
[ 10]. SA is a local search technique simulating the physical process of “annealing”. 
Different from other metaheuristics as for example population based techniques, in 
the SA a single solution is maintained. SA starts with a random solution and next, at 
each step during the neighbourhood search, a move is made. Moves are controlled by 
some probability function. The acceptance of a downhill move depends on the magni-
tude of the decrease in the objective function value and the search time. SA has been 
successfully applied to a variety of difficult optimization problems. The pseudocode 
of the basic SA algorithm is shown as Algorithm 1. More details of this algorithm and 
its applications can be found in [ 1]. 
 
Algorithm 1: Simulated annealing algorithm 
1. Set the initial temperature T0 and the low temperature TL; 
2. Set the number of iteration I; 
3. Set the control temperature Ti:=T0; 
4. Set i=0; 
5. Create initial solution s;  
6. Calculate fitness of s: f(s); 
7. While (i < I) 
8.  Apply neighborhood search procedure producing a new  
solution s’; 
9.    Calculate fitness of s’: f(s’); 
10.   If (s' is better then s) then s:=s'; 
11.   Else  
12.     Generate random number d in the interval (0,1); 
13.     If (d<exp(mod(f(s)-f(s’))/Ti)) then s:=s'; 
14.   End if 
15.   Update the control temperature Ti=f(T0,TL,i); 
16.   i:=i+1; 
17. End while. 
3.2   Agent-Based Population Learning Algorithm  
The A-Team architecture has served as a problem-solving paradigm that has been 
used to design the proposed population learning algorithm. The A-Team concept was 
originally introduced in [  17]. The concept of the A-Team was motivated by several 
approaches like blackboard systems and evolutionary algorithms, which have proven 
to be able to successfully solve some difficult combinatorial optimization problems. 
Within an A-Team agents achieve an implicit cooperation by sharing a population of

An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Data Reduction 133 
solutions, to the problem to be solved. Following the evolutionary algorithms, such 
solutions form a population consisting of individuals.  
An A-Team can be also defined as a set of agents and a set of memories, forming 
a network in which every agent remains in a closed loop. Each agent possesses some 
problem-solving skills and each memory contains a population of temporary solutions 
to the problem at hand. All agents can work asynchronously and in parallel. During 
their work agents cooperate to construct, find and improve solutions which are read 
from the shared, common memory.  
Main functionality of the agent-based population learning approach includes orga-
nizing and conducting the process of search for the best solution. It involves a  
sequence of the following steps: 
- Generation of the initial population of solutions to be stored in the common  
memory. 
- Activation of optimizing agents which apply solution improvement algorithms to 
solutions drawn from the common memory and store them back after the at-
tempted improvement applying some user defined replacement strategy. 
- Continuation of the reading-improving-replacing cycle until a stopping criterion is 
met. Such a criterion can be defined either or both as a predefined number of itera-
tions  or a limiting time period during which optimizing agents do not manage to 
improve the current best solution. After computation has been stopped  the best 
solution achieved so far is accepted as final. 
More information on the population learning algorithm with optimization procedures 
implemented as agents within an asynchronous team of agents (A-Team) can be 
found in [ 4]. In [ 4] also several its implementations are described.  
4   An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm  
This paper proposes an A-Team in which agents execute the simulated annealing 
algorithm based and cooperate in a manner describe in the preceding section with a 
view to solve instances of the reduction problem. The approach is called ABSA 
(Agent-Based Simulated Annealing). To implement the ABSA one has to set and de-
fine the following:  
- solution representation format,  
- initial population of individuals,  
- fitness function, 
- neighborhood search procedure or procedures, 
- replacement strategy implemented for managing the population of individuals. 
4.1   The Solution Representation Format 
A potential solution is represented by a string consisting of two parts. Its first part 
represents numbers of the selected reference instances. The second part includes 
numbers of the selected features.

134 I. Czarnowski and P. J ędrzejowicz 
4.2   The Initial Population 
The initial population is generated randomly. When the initial population is generated, 
the instances are grouped into clusters using the procedure proposed in [  6]. Then 
instances with identical values of this coefficient are grouped into clusters.  
Random selections of instances from initialized clusters constitute the main step of 
the first stage of generating the initial population of individuals. The number of se-
lected instances is equal to the number of initialized clusters, which means that in a 
feasible solution each cluster is represented by a single instance from the training set. 
The second part of a string representing th e solution to the data reduction problem 
and containing numbers of the selected featur es is, at this stage, generated randomly. 
To assure the required diversity the initial solutions are drawn in such a way that 
random individuals represent different numbers of features. The discussed part of the 
string has a length of minimum 1 and maximum n. 
4.3   The Fitness Function 
Each solution from the population is evaluated and the value of its fitness is calcu-
lated. The evaluation is carried out by estimating classification accuracy of the classi-
fier, which is constructed taking into account the instances and features as indicated 
by the solution. 
4.4   The Optimizing Agents  
In the proposed approach optimizing agents, which operate on individuals, are im-
plementations of the simulated annealing algorithm. Each optimizing agent tries to 
improve quality of the received solutions by applying the simulated annealing algo-
rithm. An agent, after being supplied with an individual to be improved, explores its 
neighborhood with the aim of finding a new, better solution in the neighborhood. 
To explore the neighborhood, it has been decided to implement three different  
local search moves:  
- instance replacement procedure (IRP) – the move is defined as replacing a  
randomly selected instance from a randomly chosen cluster with some other ran-
domly chosen instance thus far not included within the solution. The pseudocode 
of IRP is shown as Algorithm 2. 
 
Algorithm 2: Instance replacement procedure 
Input: s - individual representing a solution; L - list of 
numbers of instances not in s; t - number of clusters in s. 
Output: s’ - the modified solution. 
1. Set k by drawing it at random from  {1,2,…,t}; 
2. Identify r which is an instance number representing the k-
th cluster of s; 
3. Set r by drawing it at random from L; 
4. Replace the instance numbered r by the instance numbered 
r’ within the k-th cluster of s thus producing  
individual s’;

An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Data Reduction 135 
- feature replacement procedure (FRP) – the move is defined as replacing a ran-
domly selected feature with some other random feature thus far not included 
within the solution. The pseudocode of FRP is shown as Algorithm 3. 
 
Algorithm 3: Feature replacement procedure 
Input: s - individual representing a solution; M - list of 
numbers of features in s; M’ - list of numbers of features 
not in s. 
Output: s’ - the modified solution. 
1. Set f by drawing it at random from M; 
2. Set f’ by drawing it at random from M’; 
3. Replace f in s by f’ thus producing s’; 
 
- feature adding/removing procedure (FARP) – the move is defined as adding a new 
feature so far not included within the solution or removing a randomly selected 
feature from the solution. Operations of adding or removing a feature are equally 
probable. The pseudocode of FARP is shown as Algorithm 4. 
 
Algorithm 4: Feature adding/removing procedure 
Input: s - individual representing a solution; M - list of 
the numbers of features in s; M’ - list of the numbers of 
features not in s. 
Output: s’ - the modified solution. 
1. Set h by drawing it at random from the set {0,1}; 
2. If (h==0) then 
3.   Set f’  by drawing it at random from M’; 
4.   Add f’  to s producing s’; 
5. Else  
6.   Set f by drawing it at random from M; 
7.   Remove f from s producing s’; 
8. End if. 
 
The proposed A-Team is constructed from a number of the optimizing agents execut-
ing the simulated annealing algorithm using different local search moves or different 
combinations of such moves.  
4.5   The Replacement Strategy 
The proposed A-Team uses a simple replacement strategy. Each optimizing agent 
receives a solution drawn at random from the population of solutions (individuals). 
The solution returned by optimizing agent is merged with the current population re-
placing the current worst solution.

136 I. Czarnowski and P. J ędrzejowicz 
5   Computational Experiment 
5.1   Computational Experiment Settings 
To validate the proposed approach it has b een decided to carry out the computational 
experiment. The experiment aimed at answering the following two questions:  
- Does the ABSA perform better then the classic simulated annealing approach?  
- Does the choice of the local search moves influence the performance of the classi-
fication model?  
In the reported research the following A-Team architectures have been considered: 
- ABSA #1 – each optimizing agent runs the simulated annealing algorithm using 
one of the neighborhood search moves randomly drawn from the three imple-
mented, that is IRP, FRP or FARP.  The drawing takes place at each iteration, that 
is each time a solution to be improved has been forwarded to an agent  
- ABSA #2 – there are two kinds of optimizing agents – one with the IRP neighbor-
hood search procedure and another running the simulated annealing algorithm  
using one of the neighborhood search moves randomly drawn from the two im-
plemented, that is FRP or FARP. The drawing takes place at each iteration, that is 
each time a solution to be improved has been forwarded to an agent  
- ABSA #3 – three kinds of optimizing agents, each running an implementation of a 
different neighborhood search procedure. 
5.2   Dataset Choice and the Experiment Plan 
Datasets used in the experiment have been obtained from the UCI Machine Learning 
Repository [ 2]. They include:  Cleveland heart disease (303 instances, 13 attributes, 2 
classes, the best reported classification accuracy 90% [  7]), credit approval (690, 15, 2, 
86.9% [ 7]), Wisconsin breast cancer (699, 15, 2, 97.5% [  2]), sonar problem (208, 60, 
2, 87.1% [ 7]).  
Each benchmarking problem has been solved 30 times, and the experiment plan 
involved 3 repetitions of the 10-cross-validation scheme. The reported values of the 
quality measure have been averaged over all runs. The quality measure in all cases 
was the correct classification ratio. In th e 10-cross-validation scheme, for each fold, 
the training dataset was reduced using the proposed approach.  
During the experiment population size for each investigated A-Team architecture 
was set to 20. The process of searching for the best solution has been stopped either 
after 100 iterations or earlier in case there has been no improvement of the current 
best solution for one minute of computation. Values of these parameters were set 
arbitrarily. The initial temperature T0 and the low temperature TL within simulated 
annealing algorithm were set to 300 and 0.03 respectively, following suggestions of 
[ 1]. The control temperature was calculated as: )1/(1 iii TTT α+=+ , where i is the 
iteration number, )/()( 00 LL TITTT −=α , and where I is the number of iteration. 
The proposed A-Team has been implemented using the middleware environment 
called JABAT [ 4], based on JAVA code and built using JADE (Java Agent Develop-
ment Framework) [ 3].

An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Data Reduction 137 
5.3   Experiment Results 
Classification accuracy of the classifier obtained using the proposed approach (i.e. 
using the set of prototypes, found by selecting instances and removing irrelevant  
attributes) has been compared with: 
- results obtained by machine classification without data reduction, i.e. on full, non-
reduced dataset, 
- results obtained using the reduced dataset produced using the standard simulated 
annealing algorithm (SA). 
Generalization accuracy has been used as the performance criterion. The learning tool 
used was the C 4.5 algorithm [ 15]. The experiment results are shown in Table 1.  
Table 1. Accuracy  of the classification results (%) 
Problem heart cancer Credit sonar 
C 4.5 – non-reduced dataset 77.89 94.57 84.93 74.04 
ABSA #1 86.90 96.41 88.14 82.44 
ABSA #2 87.49 96.53 88.38 83.06 
ABSA #3 87.69 96.47 88.22 83.35 
SA 82.00 93.05 83.22 75.68 
Table 2. Comparison of different classifiers and data reduction approaches (I – instance selec-
tion only; F – feature selection only; IF – instance and feature selection; N – no data reduction) 
Classifier Reduction type heart cancer credit sonar 
ABSA #2 IF 87.49 96.53 88.38 83.06 
ABSA #3 IF 87.69 96.47 88.22 83.35 
k-NN [ 18] N 81.19 96.28 84.78 58.8 
k-NN + RELIEF [ 13] F 77.85 72.12 79.57 - 
CNN[ 18] I 73.95 95.71 77.68 74.12 
SNN[ 18] I 76.25 93.85 81.31 79.81 
IB3 + RELIEF[ 13] IF 79.94 73.25 71.75  
RMHC [ 16] IF 82.3 70.9 - - 
GA-KJ [ 14] IF 74.7 95.5 - 55.3 
 
It should be noted that the proposed algorithm produces very good results as com-
pared with the case when data reduction is carried-out by the standard SA algorithm. 
Similar observation holds true when the classifier is induced using original, non-
reduced dataset.  
From Table 1 it is also clear that the choice of the combination of agents in ABSA 
can have an impact on the classification accuracy. Experiment results indicate that the 
second and third variant of the ABSA algorithm, where the instance and feature selec-
tion is carried out in parallel, assures significantly better results than the ABSA #1. 
Moreover both – ABSA #2 and ABSA #3 are competitive in comparison with other

138 I. Czarnowski and P. J ędrzejowicz 
classifiers and other approaches to data reduction, which can be concluded from data 
shown in Table 2.  
Furthermore, the experiment results have shown that the proposed algorithms are 
also quite effective when a compression of the data is considered. While the average 
number of retained instances is similar in case of ABSA and standard SA, the number 
of retained features is, on average, smaller in case of using the agent-based simulated 
annealing approach. This can be concluded from the data shown in Table 3. The best 
performer from the point of view of data compression rate is clearly ABSA #3 achiev-
ing the best result in terms of decreasing the complexity of knowledge representation 
as well as reducing the computation time required. 
Table 3. Average number of retained instances and features 
Problem heart cancer credit sonar 
 average number of retained features 
ABSA #1 10.1 8.1 10.4 39 
ABSA #2 9.8 7.1 9.8 38.7 
ABSA #3 9.2 7.6 9.6 32.2 
SA 9.86 9.4 10.6 42.2 
 average number of retained instances 
all algorithms 162 133 184 94 
6   Conclusions 
The main contribution of the paper is proposing and validating a novel approach to 
solving data reduction problem. The proposed approach uses the multi-agent para-
digm and enables solving difficult data reduction optimization problem using a set of 
optimizing agents based on the simulated annealing algorithm.  
The proposed approach extends the available range of algorithms for solving data 
reduction problem. Computational experiment results have confirmed that the agent-
based simulated annealing is an effective da ta reduction tool contributing to achieving 
higher quality of machine learning classification in comparison to a standard simu-
lated annealing implementation.  It has been also shown that the parallel reduction of 
both – instances and features assures better overall results as compared with other 
considered schemes.  
Properties of the proposed approach in the term of its efficiency and computation 
time will be further studied. The future research will also focus on examination of the 
influence of the number of copies of optimizing agents on the quality of the selected 
prototypes and computation speed-up factor. It is also planned to consider hybrid 
solutions where the simulated annealing algorithm will be integrated with other local 
search procedures. 
 
Acknowledgments. This research has been supported by the Polish Ministry of  
Science and Higher Education with grant for years 2008-2010.

An Agent-Based Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Data Reduction 139 
References 
1. Aarts, E.H.L., van Laarhoven, P.J.M.: Simulated Anealing: A Pedestrian Review of the 
Theory and Some Applications. In: Devijever, P.A., Kittler, J. (eds.) Pattern Recognition 
and Applications. Springer, Berlin (1987) 
2. Asuncion, A., Newman, D.J.: UCI Machine Learning Repository. University of California, 
School of Information and Computer Science, Irvine (2007) 
http://www.ics.uci.edu/~mlearn/MLRepository.html 
3. Bellifemine, F., Caire, G., Poggi, A., Rimassa, G.: JADE. A white paper, Exp. 3(3), 6–20 
(2003) 
4. Barbucha, D., Czarnowski, I., J ędrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak-Ropel, E., Wierzbowska, I.: e-
JABAT - An Implementation of the Web-Based A-Team. In: Nguyen, N.T., Jain, I.C. 
(eds.) Intelligent Agents in the Evolution of  Web and Applications, Studies in Computa-
tional Intelligence, vol. 167, pp. 57–86. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
5. Cano, J.R., Herrera, F., Lozano, M.: On the Combination of Evolutionary Algorithms and 
Stratified Strategies for Training Set Selection in Data Mining. Applied Soft Computing 6, 
323–332 (2004) 
6. Czarnowski, I., Jędrzejowicz, P.: An Approach to Instance Reduction in Supervised Learn-
ing. In: Coenen, F., Preece, A., Macintosh, A. (eds.) Research and Development in Intelli-
gent Systems XX, pp. 267–282. Springer, London (2004) 
7. Datasets used for classification: comparison of results. In. directory of data sets, 
 http://www.is.umk.pl/projects/datasets.html (Accessed September 1, 
2009 
8. Han, J., Kamber, M.: Data Mining. Concepts and Techniques. Academic Press, San Diego 
(2001) 
9. Hamo, Y., Markovitch, S.: The COMPSET Algorithm for Subset Selection. In: Proceed-
ings of The Nineteenth International Joint Conference for Artificial Intelligence, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, pp. 728–733 (2005) 
10. Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C.D., Vecci, M.P.: Optimisation by Simulated Annealing. Sci-
ence 220, 671–680 (1983) 
11. Kohavi, R., John, G.H.: Wrappers for Feature Subset Selection. Artificial Intelli-
gence 97(1-2), 273–324 (1997) 
12. Liu, H., Motoda, H.: Instance Selection and Construction for Data Mining. Kluwer  
Academic Publisher, Dordrecht (2001) 
13. Raman, B.: Enhancing learning using featur e and example selection. Texas A&M Univer-
sity, College Station, TX, USA. (2003) 
14. Rozsypal, A., Kubat, M.: Selecting Representative Examples and Attributes by a Genetic 
Algorithm. Intelligent Data Analysis 7(4), 291–304 (2003) 
15. Quinlan, J.R.: C4.5: Programs for machin e learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,  
SanMateo (1993) 
16. Skalak, D.B.: Prototype and Feature Selection by Sampling and Random Mutation Hill 
Climbing Algorithm. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pp. 293–301 (1994) 
17. Talukdar, S., Baerentzen, L., Gove, A., de Souza, P.: Asynchronous Teams: Co-operation 
Schemes for Autonomous, Computer-Based Agents, Technical Report EDRC 18-59-96, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh (1996) 
18. Wilson, D.R., Martinez, T.R.: Reduction Techniques for Instance-based Learning Algo-
rithm. Machine Learning 33(3), 257–286 (2000)

Feature Set Reduction by Evolutionary
Selection and Construction
Katarzyna Drozdz and Halina Kwasnicka
Institute of Informatics, Wroclaw University of Technology, Wroclaw, Poland
halina.kwasnicka@pwr.wroc.pl, katarzyna.drozdz@gmail.com
http://www.ii.pwr.wroc.pl/~kwasnick
Abstract. Together with increasing sizes of collected data, the prob-
lem of feature set reduction becomes more important. Machine learning
methods, including classiﬁers, are sensitive to the training data. One of
the known problems is called ’curse of dimensionality’. Some features (at-
tributes) in the collection of data may not be informative so they obstruct
the learning process. Removing them is very desirable from the classiﬁ-
cation quality point of view. In the paper we focus on wrapper approach
to feature set reduction. We propose an evolutionary method to feature
reduction by means of selection and construction. Genetic Algorithm is
used as a tool for feature selection and Gene Expression Programming
as a tool of dimensionality reduction by features construction. The paper
presents the approach and the results of conducted experiments. Conclu-
sions and future plans end the paper.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, classiﬁcation isa very popular task in data mininga r e a.I tc oncerns
assigningd iﬀerent objects to particular classes taking into consideration values of
their attributes/features/variables.T his isa very diﬃculta ndc omplicated pro-
cess.T he qualityo fd a t aplays importantr ole in classiﬁcation accuracy. Usually
classiﬁcation methods must dealw ith high-dimensional data what causes a big
problem, known as ’curse ofd imensionality’. Moreover, a lot of attributes can be
redundant (irrelevant)w hat results in the worsening ofc lassiﬁcation accuracy.
The required number oft r aininge xamples shouldb e larger for larger number of
features [1,8,14]. Therefore,o ne oft h eimportantg oals ofd a t ap rocessing isa
reduction oft h eird imensionality. There can be mentioned two ways of reducing
the number off e a t u r e s: selection andc onstruction [6,9,10,19]. Feature selection
isat e c hnique ofc hoosingt h emost important attributes from the primary set
whereas feature construction meansc r e a tingt otally new attributes on the basis
ofs ome original features.
Feature selection. The main idea off e a t u r es election is reducingt h ea mount
of attributes by collectingt h es m allest number of importantf e a t u r e sf romt h e
original set without signiﬁcant worsening ofc lassiﬁcation accuracy. There are
two main approaches to feature selection: ﬁlter and wrapper methods [7,11].
The third approach isk nown as embedded methods [1].
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 140–149, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Feature Set Reduction by Evolutionary Selection and Construction 141
Filter method relies only on trackings ome properties off e a t u r e sto choose
the best attribute set, accordingt o assumed evaluation function. The evaluation
function can be divided into four categories: distance,i nformation, dependency,
consistency[ 2]. Filter method with distance measure estab lishes the fact that
the most desirable are these attributes which values induce a greater diﬀerence
between classes [11]. Information measure helps to point these attributes which
information gain ist h eg r e a t e s t(e.g., Decision Tree)[ 14,11]. Another measure
relies on prediction of onef e a t u r evalue fromt h evalue ofa nother and it isc alled
dependency( correlation) measure (example:P robabilityo fE r ror &A verage
Correlation Coeﬃcient)[ 1 5 ] .Consistency measure is characterized by ﬁnding
minimal feature subset that is acceptableb y established inconsistency rate [2].
Wrapper approachdiﬀers fromﬁ lter methodt h ewayo fe valuatinge a c hpoten-
tial subset off e a t u r e s.I tu s e sani nductivea lgorithm as an evaluation function.
Itm e anst h a ton ab a sis ofs ome feature subset, each examplef romt h et e s t-
ings e tisc lassiﬁed andt h er e s ult oft hisc lassiﬁcation, namely, the classiﬁcation
accuracy, isab a sis ofe valuation. In thisp a p e rwef ocus on wrapper methods.
In embedded methods there is no boundary between feature selection anda
learningp rocess.B uilta learningm odel uses a subsetofa ll possiblef e a t u r e s.F or
example, pruning included into C4.5 algorithm (cutting ofs ome branches) can
cause that some features are notu s e din the ﬁnal tree.S ome neuronal classiﬁers
use fort r aininga ll features but eachinput (i.e., each feature) has assigned weight
which is learned as all other weights.W hen some weights assigned to connections
from inputs are close to zero, itm e anst h a tp r a c tically, these inputs (features)
don ot inﬂuence the ﬁnal decision.
Feature selection isa very complex task.I fa no riginal set contains N at-
tributes, the totaln umber ofp otential subsets is2 N.M any search strategies can
be used in both, ﬁlter and wrapper methods, they are grouped in three main ap-
proaches [2]. Complete generation isb a s e don complete searchofe a c hcompeting
candidate subset (e.g., branch andb ound, best ﬁrst search or beam search). It
ist ime-consuming, however itg u a r anties ﬁndingt h eoptimal subset. Heuristic
generation relies on consideringa ll attributes that remain to beings elected to
feature subset duringe a c hiteration. Random generationisb a s e don randomc r e-
atingc andidate subsets.T he search space iss imilar to complete generation but
itc an be decreased thanks to establishingt h em aximum number of iterations.
Feature construction. The p opular technique of decreasingt h e number of
features isc r e a ting new features on the basis ofs ome transformation of orig-
inalo nes.T he result oft hisp rocess isa new set oft otally new features that
maximizes some criteria,o r it isa t least as gooda st h eoriginalo ne. Statistical
methods [8] are the main approach, they belongt o ﬁlter group, e.g., Principal
Component Analysis (PCA), MultidimensionalS caling (MDS) or Independent
Component Analysis (ICA). These methods require statistical measures that
cani dentify the main attributes in results e t [18]. However, they haveq uite
signiﬁcantd isadvantageous, mainly theyw ork eﬃciently only on numerical fea-
tures. Evolutionary methods [9,13,16] representh e u ristic approach.A common
approach to feature construction isu singG enetic Programming (GP). GPi sa

142 K. Drozdz and H. Kwasnicka
(a) Feature conversion,
f
′
= f2/f1 + f3, fi – ith
initial feature
(b) ’A lot of features in one result’, n –n u m b e ro fn e wf e a -
tures, ai - ith initial feature
Fig. 1. Features construction on a basis of arithmetic expression trees
special method which main aim ist o ﬁnd the best program accordingt o some
established criteria [17,19]. Usually ac omputer program isr e p r e s ented as a tree
structure,w here in nodes there are fu nctionsa nd in leaves terminals.F ig.1 a
presents an example of tree that descr ibes some original data conversion. De-
pending on the evaluation function weu s e, evolutionary methodc an be classiﬁed
as a ﬁlter or wrapper method.H o wever,i t is importantt h a tt h eaim oft h eg e-
neticp rogrammingp rocess isc r e a ting one new attribute that wouldb et h eb e s t
accordingt o the evaluation function. In some wayi t characterizes simplicity,
but meanwhile it loses all information about the interaction that can appear in
ar e s ultingf e a t u r es e t.T he alternative approach isg enerating new feature sets
that contain constructed features (Fig.1 b). Because oft h ef a c t, that in thist r e e
only arithmetice xpressionsa r eu s e d, the methodc anw ork only with numerical
features. Otherwise the evolutional results wouldb eh ighly coupled with the way
that numericalv ariables haveb e en associated with symbolic values.
2 Evolutionary Approach to Feature Set Reduction
In thisp a p e rwef ocus on evolutionary approach to feature set reduction. We
haveu s e daG enetic Algorithm (GA) [13] to feature selection, andG eneE x-
pression Programming (GEP) [4,5] to feature construction (”a lot off e a t u r e sin
oner e s ult”). These both methods use learninga lgorithm to feature evaluation,
soi n fact, the wrapper approach was applied.T he computer application was
developed tov erify eﬀectiveness oft hose methods.
Feature selection problem deﬁnition. Feature selection problem can be deﬁned
as follows:
Input data: as e tofd a t aD in af orm of K vectors (learninge xamples), each
example is described by n features and its class label,i .e. D=[x1,x2, ... ,xK],
xi =[ xj
i ,c la s s], i =1 , 2, ... ,K ; j =1 , 2,,n ; xj
i –v alue of jth feature of ith
learninge xample, class isac lass tow hich ith exampleb elongs.
Feature selection problem ist o select a subset of m features,w here m<n
without perceptible worseningt h eclassiﬁcation accuracy.

Feature Set Reduction by Evolutionary Selection and Construction 143
Output data: a subset of m from n features,i .e., resultingd a t as e tD consists
of K vectors: D=[x1,x2, ... ,xK], where xi =[ xj
i ,c la s s], i =1 , 2, ... ,K ; j ∈
1, 2, ... ,m ,m<n .
Feature construction problem deﬁnition. Input data: as e tofd a t aD, similar as
in feature selection problem, additionally we set a parameter r – an assumed
number ofr e s ultingf e a t u r e s, r<n .
Features construction problem ist o construct r new features:
yl
i, yl
i = fl(x1
i , ... ,xn
i ), l =1 , 2, ... ,r , r<n ,w ithout perceptible worseningt h e
classiﬁcation accuracy.
Output data – as e t of r new features calculated on the basis of n initial
ones,i .e., resultingd a t as e tD consists of K vectors: D=[y1,y2, ... ,y K], where
yi =[ y1
i , ... ,y r
i ,c la s s], i =1 , 2, ... ,K ; yl
i = fl(x1
i ,x2
i , ... ,xn
i ), l =1 , 2, ... ,r ,
r<n .
Proposed method. The general schema ofd eveloped computer system is illus-
trated in Fig. 2.T here are two ways of feature reduction: by selection only, by
construction only, orp e r forming in any order both oft h e m.W ep ropose to use
ﬁrstly selection because it assures rea l reduction of initial set off e a t u r e s, and
nextc onstruction – ita llowst o further diminish a number off e a t u r e sgiven as
ani nput to the learninga lgorithm.
Fig. 2. A general schema of the feature reduction system
Our s ystem consists oft h r e em ain modules: Selector, Constructor and
Evaluator.T he additional module, Data transformer ,i sr e q uired to pre-
pare a proper data set acc ordingt o the feature set indicated by an evaluated
individuali n the evolved population.
Selector isas impleg enetica lgorithm [13], binary coded.W eu s etypical mu-
tation, one-o rt wo-pointc rossover andt h eroulette-wheel selection method with

144 K. Drozdz and H. Kwasnicka
survival the best individuals (a number ofs u rvivali ndividuals isas ystem pa-
rameter). The used ﬁtness function is:
fitness = w∗ accuracy +( 1− w)∗ (1− nones/nfeatures ),
where w isa weight which stresses theimportance of accuracy( o nat e s tings e t),
nones isa number of ones in the individual( number ofs elected features), and
nfeatures isa number off e a t u r e sin the initial data set D.
In the developed program wec an start evolution with w =1 anda f t e ra
number ofg enerations,w hen evolution produces subsets off e a t u r e sallowing
classiﬁcation with high accuracy, wec an change w to force further cutting ofa n
evolved feature set.I n such situations, a user receives two solutions:o ne ist h e
best taking into accountt h eclassiﬁcation accuracy, andt h es e cond – the best
onet a king into accountt h eweighted classiﬁcation accuracy anda number of
used features.
Constructoru s e sG EP approach [5], which links the idea ofs imple linear
chromosome that isu s e din genetica lgorithm andb r anched structure with dif-
ferents izes used in geneticp rogramming.S uch approach allowst o calculate new
features as mathematical expressions oft h einitialo nes.
The most importantp a r tofG EP approach is individual coding.T hanks to
diﬀerentr ules it isp ossiblet o describe each one in a linear way( see Fig.3 ) .
Fig. 3. Ac o d i n gs c h e m ai nG E P
Havings o easily coded chromosome wec an use mutation andc rossing-over
operators which are quite similar ton ormal( basic) Genetic Algorithm’sa nda lso
transposition operator which allowss wappingd iﬀerentp a r t sofc h romosome.A l l
oft h e s eoperators are adapted t o GEP algorithm andt h anks toi t, they can
create new solutions which are semantically correct.
GEP requires the number ofﬁ nal features in each potential resultt o be con-
stant, this number isap a r a m e t e roft h em e t hods e tby users.I no ur experiments
this number was sat as 2 /3 oft h enumber that had bee n pointed by the best
result off e a t u r es election (Table 3, 4).

Feature Set Reduction by Evolutionary Selection and Construction 145
3 Experimental Results
Numerous experiments were carried out, theirm ain aim was to check the per-
formance ande ﬃ c a cyo fp roposed evolutionary approach to feature reduction
problem by feature selection and /orc onstruction. Four datasets with diﬀerent
number off e a t u r e s,n umber ofc lasses, and number of learninge xamples were
used in experiments, they are presented in Table 1. These data sets are available
forf r e eon page http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/index
 datasets.html. Be-
cause we assumed using only simple numerical functions in GEP, wec hose data
sets containing only numerical type off e a t u r e s.An umber of initial tests were
made to check suitable values ofs ystem parameters.
Table 1. Datasets used in the experiments
Name
 Features No.
 Learning examples No.
 Class No.
Sonar
 60
 208
 2
Vehicle
 18
 846
 4
Segment
 19
 2310
 7
Heart-statlog
 13
 270
 2
3.1 Feature Selection
First part ofe xperiments were made with using only Selectorm odule.T heira im
was to test ifag e netica lgorithm isa blet o considerably diminish a number of
used features for learningb oth used classiﬁers.T able2c ontains values ofa ll pa-
rameters ofG enetic Algorithm used as a selection tool. The results obtained for
all data sets andb oth learninga lgorithms are presented in Table 3 and Table4 .
The results show that initial accuracy cani ncrease remarkably with simultane-
ously decreasing number off e a t u r e su s e dforc lassiﬁer learning.I t is worth to
recall our requirements:w e wanted to diminish a number off e a t u r e swithout
worseningc lassiﬁcation accuracyo btained usingt h e wholef e a t u r es e t. Classi-
ﬁcation accuracyi se nclosed in range [0,1], where 1 meanst h a te a c hexample
fromt h et e s tings e twas correctly classiﬁed,w hile 0 that none.U sually feature
selection with neuraln etwork had worse results (classiﬁcation accuracyo fb e s t
results was lower thani n C4.5 case). The reason oft hisf a c tcouldb ed iﬃcultyi n
BPNN learningu singd a t ad e s c ribed by diﬀerents e t sof attributes.T hisc ould
also entail another observation – the best results which had been generated dur-
inge volutionary process were diﬀerent in case ofu sing BPNN andC 4.5. Besides,
it was noticeablet h a tclassiﬁcation accuracyo btained using BPNN on data de-
scribed by attributes that had been previously pointed duringf e a t u r es election
with C4.5 algorithm,w as lower than decision tree had appointed.T hisc an sug-
gest that feature subsetisg oode nough only forc lassiﬁcation algorithm that was
used duringe volutionary process,i .e,i n the feature selection phase wes hould
use the learninga lgorithm which isp lanned to be used as the ﬁnal classiﬁer.

146 K. Drozdz and H. Kwasnicka
Table 2. Genetic Algorithm parameters for the used data sets
Data set:
 Sonar
 Vehicle
 Segment
 Heart-statlog
Population size:
 100
 50
 50
 50
Max. Generation No.:
 100
 80
 50
 100
Mutation Coeﬃcient:
 0.05
 0.05
 0.05
 0.05
Crossing-over type:
 two-point
 one-point
 one-point
 one-point
Crossing-over coeﬃcient:
 0.60
 0.60
 0.60
 0.60
Selection type:
 Roulette
 Roulette
 Roulette
 Roulette
Best survive No.
 3
 3
 3
 3
Table 3. Feature selection best results using C4.5
C4.5
Data set:
 Initial Accuracy
 Feature No.
 Features [%]
 Accuracy
 Acc. improvement
[%]
Sonar
 0.71827
 19
 32.67
 0.84327
 17.40
Vehicle
 0.72742
 12
 66.67
 0.75296
 3.51
Segment
 0.96771
 10
 52.63
 0.97316
 0.56
Heart-statlog
 0.77111
 4
 30.77
 0.86074
 11.62
Table 4. Feature selection best results using BPNN
BPNN
Data set:
 Initial Accuracy
 Feature No.
 Features [%]
 Accuracy
 Acc. improvement
[%]
Sonar
 0.78269
 27
 45.00
 0.83077
 6.14
Vehicle
 0.80898
 12
 66.67
 0.82979
 2.57
Segment
 0.90338
 8
 42.11
 0.91939
 1.77
Heart-statlog
 0.83185
 10
 5.92
 0.84815
 1.96
3.2 Feature Construction
Feature construction appeared to be also good way to decrease a number of
features.W eu s e dd a t as e t scontaininga ll features. Experiments were held with
GEP parameters presented in Table 5. The results are presented in Table 6. It
is importantt h a tin each case classiﬁcation accuracyi ncreased.
Very popular practice isc a r rying out feature construction after selection. In
order to this idea veriﬁcation, additional experiments were made with Construc-
torm odulea ndC 4.5 algorithm.T he used input data sets were the best given by
Selectorm odule, but a number ofc onstructed features was the changed parame-
ter.A s it iss hown in Fig. 4, the ﬁnal accuracy can remarkably increase (the best
feature selection result on dataset Sonar had 19 features and 0.8433 accuracy,
and on dataset Vehicleh a d12f e a t u r e sand 0.75296 accuracy).

Feature Set Reduction by Evolutionary Selection and Construction 147
Table 5. GEP parameters for the used data sets
Data set:
 Sonar
 Vehicle
 Segment
 Heart-statlog
Population size:
 70
 50
 50
 50
Max. Generation No.:
 100
 100
 100
 100
Genes count:
 13
 8
 7
 3
Head length:
 2
 2
 2
 2
Mutation Coeﬃcient:
 0.06
 0.06
 0.06
 0.06
Crossing-over type:
 two-point
 two-point
 two-point
 one-point
Crossing-over coeﬃcient:
 0.60
 0.60
 0.60
 0.60
Gene crossing-over coeﬀ.:
 0.20
 0.20
 0.20
 –
Max. Gene No in gene crossing-over:
 2
 2
 2
 –
IS coeﬃcient:
 0.10
 0.10
 0.10
 0.10
IS length:
 2o r3
 2o r3
 2o r3
 2o r3
RIS coeﬃcient:
 0.10
 0.10
 0.10
 0.10
RIS length:
 2
 2
 2
 2
Selection type:
 Roulette
 Roulette
 Roulette
 Roulette
Best survive No.
 3
 3
 3
 2
Table 6. Feature construction results in comparison to attribute selection (with C4.5)
Selection
 Construction
Data set:
 Feature No.
 Final Accuracy.
 Feature No.
 Accuracy
 Acc. improvement
in relation to
selection [%]
Sonar
 19
 0.84327
 13
 0.8962
 6.27
Vehicle
 12
 0.75296
 8
 0.7681
 2.01
Segment
 10
 0.97316
 7
 0.9745
 0.13
Heart-statlog
 4
 0.86074
 3
 0.8659
 0.60
(a) dataset Sonar
 (b) dataset Vehicle
Fig. 4. Dependence of accuracy of the best result on number of ﬁnal features (genes)

148 K. Drozdz and H. Kwasnicka
4 Summary
Presented experiments show that usage ofe volutionary approach to feature re-
duction is justiﬁed.F eature selection as well as construction gives goodr e s ults.
It is noticeable that attribute construction’s best results assign higher classiﬁca-
tion accuracy than feature selection alone.T hat is why, carrying out selection
before construction to decrease searchings p a c eisag oods olution.
Because of indeterministicb e h avior of neuraln etworks,i t was diﬃcultt o re-
duce feature setin case ofu singt h e mto evaluate candidate results.F ore xample,
a neuraln etwork learnt veryw ell on data thatwas described by full attribute set,
but when thiss e twas decreased it had huge problems to do this duringr e q uired
number ofe pochs.T hat suggests that usingC 4.5 ism u c hmore preferred.
Numerous experiments haveb e en performed and observed.A nalysis ofa bove
results allowst o put the hypothesist h a tit is worth to use Construction module
as the feature set reduct ion. But experiments show that Constructorm odule
does not work sow ell wheni tu s e st h ewhole initial set off e a t u r e s– the search
space ist oo large.S oi t is worth to use ﬁrstly Selectora nd nextC onstructor.
The second important issue ist h a tConstructor destructs the semanticm e aning
of the features.N ew constructed features are notu nderstandablef oru s e r s.I n
some real-livep roblems measuring off e a t u r evalues isq uite expensive, fors u c h
problems selector seems to be more suitable because itd iminishes a number of
real features.T oconstruct onef e a t u r e sanumber ofr e al( measured) features can
be required.
Obtained results havee ncouraged us to extend our system, especially the con-
structorm odule.W ep lan to develope nlarged set off unctions Fw hich allowst o
use the system with data containingd iﬀerentt ype off e a t u r e s,n ot only numeri-
cal. Such system will be veriﬁed usingag r e a t e rnumber ofb enchmark data sets
as well as real data.
Acknowledgments. This work isp a r tially ﬁnanced fromt h eMinistryo f Sci-
ence and Higher Education Republic of Polandr e sources in 2008–2010 years as
a Poland–Singapore joint research project 65/N-SINGAPORE/2007/0.
References
1. Chao-Ton, S., Chien-Hsin, Y.: Feature selection for the SVM: An application to
hypertension diagnosis. Expert Syst. Appl. 34(1), 754–763 (2008)
2. Dash, M., Huan Liu, H., Motoda, H.: Feature Selection Using Consistency Measure.
In: Arikawa, S., Furukawa, K. (eds.) DS 1999. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 1721, p. 737.
Springer, Heidelberg (1999)
3. Dash, M., Liu, H.: Feature Selection for Classiﬁcation. Elsevier, Amsterdam (1997)
4. Ferreira, C.: Gene Expression Programming: A New Adaptive Algo-
rithm for Solving Problems. Complex Systems 13(2), 87–129 (2001),
http://www.gene-expression-programming.com/webpapers/gepfirst.pdf
5. Ferreira, C.: Gene Expression Programming: Mathematical Modeling by an Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)

Feature Set Reduction by Evolutionary Selection and Construction 149
6. Guyon, I., Gunn, S., Nikravesh, M., Zadeh, L.A.: Feature Extraction: Foundations
and Applications. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
7. Hall, M.A., Holmes, G.: Benchmarking attribute selection techniques for discrete
class data mining. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 15(6),
1437–1447 (2003)
8. Jain Anil, K., Duin Robert, P.W., Mao, J.: Statistical Pattern Recognition: A
Review. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 22(1),
4–37 (2000)
9. Krawiec, K.: Genetic Programming-based Construction of Features for Machine
Learning and Knowledge Discovery Tasks. In: Genetic Programming and Evolvable
Machines, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (2002)
10. Liu, H.: Toward Integrating Feature Selection Algorithms for Classiﬁcation and
Clustering. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 17(4),7 491–
502 (2005)
11. Liu, H., Motoda, H.: Computational Methods of Feature Selection. Chapman &
Hall/Crc Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Series. Chapman and Hall/CRC,
Boca Raton (2008)
12. Maimon, O., Rokach, L.: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Handbook.
Springer Science & Business, Heidelberg (2005)
13. Michalewicz, Z.: Genetic Algorithms + Data Structures = Evolution Programs,
3rd edn. Springer, Heidelberg (1999)
14. Mitchel, T.: Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math., New
York (1997)
15. Mucciardi, A.N., Gose, E.E.: A Comparison of Seven Techniques for Choosing
Subsets of Pattern Recognition Properties. IEEE Transactions on Computers 20(9),
1023–1031 (1971)
16. Muharram, M., Smith, G.D.: Evolutionary Constructive Induction. IEEE Trans-
action on Knowledge and Data Engineering 17(11), 1518–1528 (2005)
17. Otero, F.E.B., Silva, M.M.S., Freitas, A.A., Nievola, J.C.: EuroGP 2003. LNCS,
vol. 2610, pp. 101–121. Springer, Heidelberg (2003)
18. Rayner, A.: DARA: Data Summarisation with Feature Construction, AICMS
2008. In: Second Asia International Conference on Modelling & Simulation, AMS,
pp. 830–835 (2008)
19. Smith, M.G., Bull, L.: Genetic Programming with a Genetic Algorithm for Feature
Construction and Selection. In: Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines,
Springer, Heidelberg (2005)

Iterative Method for Improving Consistency
of Multi-attribute Object Judgments
Performed by Teams of Decision Makers
Henryk Piech and Urszula Bednarska
Institute of Comp. & Information Sci., Czestochowa University of Technology,
Dabrowskiego 73, 42-200 Czestochowa, Poland
h.piech@adm.pcz.czest.pl
Abstract. Groups of decision makers form judgments of given objects,
using sets of inconsistent data. This issue was described in many papers
and the practical usage was presented by Saaty in his method of relative
judgments. Typically only some attributes are chosen for judging. Judg-
ments are relative, usually scaled or normalized. In this paper we try to
aggregate the given judgments and make them consistent. We allocate a
single elements of the Saaty’s matrix (vectors or rows) for each decision
maker. We need to remember that consistency of group decision making
can be achieved in many ways and that it concerns diﬀerent structural
level of judgments.
1 Introduction
One oft h em ost importants t e p sin multi-criteria optimization is judgingt h e
weights of joined criteria [9]. Also a very serious issue in Saaty’sm e t hodology
(and in AHP method)i s weights choosing.D ecision makingp rocess isb a s e d
on relativep airwise comparison of judgments giveni n matrices [8]. Duringt h e
judgments makingp rocess weu s ee .g. the principal convention based on the
eigenvectors [11] ort h eLeast Squares Method [13]. Judgments can be given as
numbers ora s linguistic preferences [1]. Researchers also studyi ssues of interval
[3], fuzzy[ 5 ]ort h emost favorable [14]w eights.U sing Saaty’sm e t hodologyw e
can compare objects, their attributes or the dec ision makers [12]. As objects
wec onsider companies, banks,i n vestments, paintings, products, machines, etc.
[6]. The case oft e a m sofd e cision makers forming judgments iss olved using
methods based on averages (e.g.W eighted Geometric MeanM ethod [2], Linear
Programming [14]o rt h eGoalP rogramming AHP [15] In thisp a p e rwep r e s ent
the idea of adaptingt h eIterative Method of ImprovingC onsistency to solvet his
issue.
2 The Idea of Improving Relative Judgments to the
Given Consistency Level
Presented method isb a s e don the structureof Saaty’sm a t rix [9]. Table 1 presents
the basicp airwise comparison matrix for one judgment vector.
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 150–159, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Iterative Method for Improving Consistency 151
Table 1. Vector of relative pairwise comparisons
The matrix from Tab.1i sc onsistent,w hich meanst h a tevery eigenvalue λ
[10] ise q u al to the number of attributes,n amely the size oft h em a t rix. However,
experts make their judgments relatively and notb a s e don the weight vector,i n
some cases the judgments are given linguistically. In order to simplify the proce-
dure,w e only give judgments above orb elow the main diagonal, that consists of
ones.T he elements below ora bovea r ecompleted with reciprocals of respective
elements.T he matrix given by the decision makers isp r e s ented in Tab. 2.
Table 2. Matrix given by decision makers
The matrix from Tab. 2d oes not need to be consistenta ndu s u ally is not.
The idea of iterative improvementt o the given consistencyl evelw as created by
bringingt h etwo matrices together.I n the ﬁrst step wec hoose (subjectively) a
randomr ow orc olumn. Fore xampleb y choosing k-th row we obtain for i, j⁄= k:
a(k,j )= w(k)/w(j), (1)
a(k,i )= w(k)/w(i). (2)

152 H. Piech and U. Bednarska
Joining (1) and (2)w e obtain the newj udgment oft h eelement which is located
on the crossing oft h ei-th row andt h ej-th column:
a′(i, j)= w(i)
w(j) =
w(k)
w(j)
w(k)
w(i)
. (3)
The actualv alue oft his judgment isu s u ally diﬀerent, and as the measure of
inconsistencyw eu s et h es u mofa b solute diﬀerences between the original and
the newv alue.T herefore we introduce a newi ndicator which enables us to state
by how much the newv alue isd iﬀerentf romt h eoriginal:
Δ(i, j)= a(i, j)− a(k,j )
a(k,i ) (if wec hoose the k-th row, k⁄= i), (4)
Δ(i, j)= a(i, j)− a(i, k)
a(j, k) (if wec hoose the k-th column, k⁄= j). (5)
To measure the inconsistencyw eu s et h efollowingC onsistencyI ndex:
CI = λmax− m
m− 1 (6)
ort h eConsistency Ratio:
CR = CI
R , (7)
where R stands forar a ndomc onsistencyv alue [4] and λmax isa n average eigen-
value:
λmax = 1
m
m∑
i=1
λi. (8)
In most papers the eigenvector isd e rived usingt h efollowinga lgorithm [8]:
Step 1: fore very column j calculate the sum,w hich is later used ton ormalize
the judgments.
sum
 c(j)=
m∑
p=1
a(p, j);j =1 , ... ,m , (9)
an(i, j)= a(i, j)
sum
 c(j); i, j =1 , ... ,m . (10)
Step 2: fore very row i calculate the sum of normalized judgments.A st h ey are
normalized, the sum equalst h esize oft h em a t rix.
sum
 r(i)=
m∑
s=1
an(i, s);i =1 , ... ,m . (11)
Step 3: the eigenvector oft h em a t rix isg iven as follows:
w(i)= sum
 r(i)/m. (12)

Iterative Method for Improving Consistency 153
Step 4: calculate the left side oft h eexpression: Aw = mw [8] by substituting
the calculated eigenvector.
Step 5: as the set ofs imultaneous equations is well coordinated it isp ossiblet o
calculate the average eigenvalue λmax.
3 Adapting the Consistency Improvement Algorithm to
Multi-expert Systems
Wea r eaware of the fact that the group ofd e cision makers, keepingt h eir inde-
pendence, gives a set of judgment vectors that are inconsistent.H o wever,i t is
possible that the judgments are close to consistency. We assume that dec ision
makers are experts and that they are using the same set ofc riteria,i n the same
order.D ecision makers are treated in the same way, i.e. each oft h e mh a san
equalv o ice.T hism e anst h a tevery decision maker isa llocated a row (column)
(i.e. the i-th row ort h ei-th column) of Saaty’sm a t rix. The row (column) isc r e-
ated on the basis oft h ea b solute judgments oft h ei-th decision maker (Tab.3 ) .
Table 3. Absolute judgements given by the j-th decision maker
The ﬁnal form of Saaty’sm a t rix consists ofs u c hrows.T heir number ise q u al
to the number of attributes m (Tabs 4,5 ) .D ue to thisf a c tt h econdition of
equaln umber ofe xperts and attributes has to be fulﬁlled.W ea r eaware that
this is nota lwaysp ossible.T hisg enerates additional problems, that can easily
be solved.
Table 4. Relative decision maker’s judgements arranged in the i-th row of saaty’s
matrix
Ift h enumber ofd e cision makers ne exceeds thenumber of attributes (ne > m)
than by usingt h ec ombinatorial algorithm it isp ossiblet o select a gr oup of
decision makers who guarantee the greatest consistencyo ft h er elative judgments
in the wholem a t rix (minimal CIo rC R). An adaptivea lgorithm isp r e s ented
in Fig.1 .

154 H. Piech and U. Bednarska
Table 5. Relative decision maker’s judgements arranged in the i-th column of saaty’s
matrix
Algorithm description:
The ﬁrst m cycles, k =1 , ...,m ensures that combinatorial sets are ge nerated
for ne decision makers. Obviously the number ofc ombinationse q u als
(ne
m
)
.
Fora nother set ofe xperts wee s timate the consistencyl evel CR(i1,i2, ... ,i m),
usinge q u a tions (6)-(12) to assess the gr oup consistency. To improvet h econ-
sistencyl evel calculate the correction increments del(i1,i2, ... ,i m) usinge q u a-
tions (4), (5). D epending on the accepted c onvention [7]w ec hoose maximal,
minimal, ora verage correction increment.S imultaneously we accumulate ev-
ery correction made in subsequent iterations: s = s +|del(i1,i2, ... ,i m)|.A fter
correctingt h ec hosenj udgment we asses the c onsistencyl evel andc ompare it
with the given consistencyl evel– eps.I ft h ec onsistencyl eveli s not reached:
CR(i1,i2, ... ,i m) >e p s,w ec ontinue the judgments improvinga lgorithm.F rom
the sets ofd e cision makers wec hoose the onet h a th a st h es m allest accumulated
correction value: iopt1,i o p t2, ... ,i o p tm.
4 Example of Multi-expert Decision Making and the Idea
of Algorithm Modiﬁcation
In the followinge xampleﬁ vee xperts judge ano bject with four attributes.A b-
solute judgments w(i, j) are shown in Tab.6 .
In order to standardize (i.e. make the numbers ofd e cision makers anda t-
tributes equal), teams consisting off our experts were appointed.T heirt a s kwas
to perform pairwise comparisons ofg iven attributes (Tab. 7).
The results ofs e a r c hingf ora no ptimal decision makers team andt h ec on-
sistent judgments are presented in Tab. 8.T he ﬁrst row consists oft h et e a m s
codes.
The optimal team ist h e2345 group (corrections accumulation is 1,85). The
iterativep rocess of improvementu singm aximal corrections iss ho w ni nF ig. 2.

Iterative Method for Improving Consistency 155
Fig. 1. The algorithm of choosing the optimal decision makers team and improving
their judgments to the given consistency level
Table 6. Absolute judgements of decision makers team
Itc an be shown that achievingt h egiven consistencyl evel, both theoretically
andp r a c tically, also depends on the place where the judgments are located in
Saaty’sm a t rix, i.e.i ft h ey are located in the i-th ort h ek-th row (column). Due
to thisf a c tweb roadeno ur research with the change of judgments order in the

156 H. Piech and U. Bednarska
Table 7. Decision making teams and the relative judgements based on Table 4
Table 8. The results of searching for an ‘optimal’ decision makers team, divided into
iterations
Fig. 2. Convergence to the given consistency level

Iterative Method for Improving Consistency 157
matrix. Practically weu s ecombinatorial solutionsb a s e dnot on combinations but
on permutations.P ermutation excludes the existence ofm ore thano ner ow (col-
umn) fore a c hd e cision maker, but considers the change of location. It is only the
change ofe lements’o rder (i.e. rows orc olumns)i nthe team.We obtain all possible
sets fore a c hd e cision makingg roup.F ore xample, forg roup 1234 we obtain:
12342 134 3124 4 123
1243 21433 1 42 4 132
1324 2 314 32144 2 13
1342 2 3413 241 4231
1423 2413 3 4124 312
14322 4 31 3 421 4321
The number ofp e r m u t a tionsf org roups (ﬁve oft h e min the given exam-
ple) equals lp = ne!
(ne−m)! = 5!
(5−4)! =1 20. Concentrating only on onet e a mwe
Fig. 3. Creating of ordered group of decision makers who will be taken into account in
Saaty’s matrix conﬁguration

158 H. Piech and U. Bednarska
Table 9. The optimal permutation for cumulated corrections for improving consistency
obtain: lpi = 4! = 24.T he proposed modiﬁcation oft h ealgorithm concernst h e
combinatorial part and isp r e s ented in Fig.3 .
Algorithm description:
Thisa lgorithm isa n adaptation o f the pre vious one (Fig.1 ) donef orp e r-
mutations. Each loop includes ﬁlters that e xclude outside chosen parameters
ik−1,i k−2, ... ,i1. Results oft h eanalysisf orp e r m u t a tion sets are giveni nTab.9 .
Clearly correction elements, based on which wec alculate correction values
(i.e. rows orc olumns) alsoi n ﬂuence the correction results.W hen there are more
attributes than decision makers wep e r form analysist o choose such judgments
set that woulde nsure the minimali nconsistence of Saaty’sm a t rix. This issue
needs further analysis in subsequentp a p e r s.
5 Conclusions
1. When the number ofd e cision makers exceeds the number of attributes,w e
choose the optimal team ofd e cision makers,o rdered in the way that ensures
the minimalv alue of accumulated corrections.A sa no ptimization criterion
it isa lso possiblet o use the minimaln umber of iterations, that are needed
too btain the given consistencyl evel.
2.W hen the number of attributes exceeds the number ofd e cision makers,w e
can use parts of judgment vectors to redoublet h er elative judgments number
(rows orc olumns).
3. The choice ofc orrection rows orc olumns inﬂuences the consistencyi mprove-
mentr e s ults.T here isa need forf u r t h e rr e s e a r c hon this issue.H o wever,
choosing the ﬁrst r ow ort h e last column seems to be most eﬀective. On
the other hand,w ec an make combinationsu singp a r toft h ei-th row and
the k-th columno rt h ek-th row andt h ei-th columni no rder to calculate
the correction increments.
4.T he permutation version oft h ealgorithm used forc hoosingt e a m sandt h eor-
der ofd e cision makers with ﬁxed correction elemente nsures that judgments
ofe very decision maker are used as a correction base.T hise nsures optimal
and objectiver e s ultm inimizingt h evalue ort h enumber ofc orrections.

Iterative Method for Improving Consistency 159
5. Decision makers can be classiﬁed based on the minimal accumulated cor-
rection value oft h eir judgments concerningc ooperation with other decision
makers, usinga ll attributes and added in all iterations.
6. In most papers experts are aggregated usingm e t hods which are based either
on averages or Linear Programming.T he main advantage of the proposed
method is its iterative character.F urthermore the proposed methode nables
us to choose the most consistentm a t rix, while other methods can generate
inconsistentr e s ults.
References
1. Dong, Y., Xu, Y., Li, H.: On consistency measures of linguistic preference relation.
European Journal of Operational Research 189, 430–444 (2008)
2. Escobar, M.T., Aguaron, J., Moreno-Jimenez, J.M.: A note on AHP group con-
sistency for the row geometric mean priorization procedure. European Journal of
Operational Research 153, 318–322 (2004)
3. Kazumoti, S., Hiroaki, I., Hideo, T.: Interval priorities by interval regression anal-
ysis. European Journal of Operational Research 158, 745–754 (2004)
4. Krawczyk, S.: Metody ilo´ sciowe w planowaniu dzia/suppresslalno´sci przedsiebiorstwa.
C.H.Beck, Warszawa (2001)
5. Mikhailov, L.: Deriving priorities from fuzzy pairwise comparison judgments. Fuzzy
Sets and Systems 134, 365–385 (2003)
6. Mikhailov, L.: Group prioritization in the AHP by fuzzy preference programming
method. Computer and Operation Research 31, 293–301 (2004)
7. Piech, H.: The methodology of improvement of consistent in Saaty’s matrix judg-
ments. Scientiﬁc Research of the Institute of Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence 1(7), 159–170 (2008)
8. Saaty, T.L.: Fundamentals of decision Making and Priority Theory with the Ana-
lytic Hierarchy Process. RWS Publications, Pittsburgh (1994)
9. Saaty, T.L.: The Analitic Hierarchy Process. McGraw-Hill, New York (1980)
10. Saaty, T.L.: Multicriteria Decision Making: Analytic Hierarchy Process. RWS Pub-
lications, Pittsburgh (1994)
11. Sharma, J.M., Moon, I., Bae, H.: Analytic hierarchy process to assess and optimize
distribution network. Applied Mathematics and Computation 202, 256–265 (2008)
12. Walley, P.: Belief – function representations of statistical evidence. Ann. Stat.,
741–761 (1987)
13. Wang, Y.M., Elhag, T.M.S., Hua, Z.S.: A modiﬁed fuzzy logarithmic least
squares method for fuzzy analytic hierarchy process. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 157,
3055–3071 (2006)
14. Wang, Y.M., Parkan, C., Luo, Y.: A linear programming method for generating
the most favorable weights from a pairwise comparison matrix. Computers and
Operational Research 35, 3918–1930 (2008)
15. Yu, C.S.: A GP-AHP Method for solving group decision-making fuzzy AHP prob-
lems. Computers and Operational Research 29, 1969–2001 (2002)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 160–169, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Experimental Investigation of the Synergetic Effect 
Produced by Agents Solving Together Instances of the 
Euclidean Planar Travelling Salesman Problem 
Piotr Jędrzejowicz and Izabela Wierzbowska 
Department of Information Systems, Gdynia Maritime Academy, 
Morska 81-87, 81-225 Gdynia, Poland 
{pj,iza}@am.gdynia.pl 
Abstract. The goal of the paper is to identify and confirm the existence of the 
synergetic effect produced by agents solving together instances of the Euclidean 
planar travelling salesman problem. The research included the computational 
experiment in which computation results produced by six implemented A-
Teams are analyzed. The reported A-Teams have been built using the JABAT 
environment. Combinations of five local search procedures, each encoded as an 
optimizing agent, have been used. The experiment involved instances of the 
Euclidean planar travelling salesman problem of different sizes. Problem  
instances have been solved by different A-Teams  with different numbers of in-
dividuals in the population of solutions stored in the common memory. The  
research has confirmed that constructing an A-Team from heterogeneous opti-
mizing agents might result in achieving a synergetic effect and thus increasing a 
quality of the computation results. 
Keywords: agents, optimization problem, asynchronous team. 
1   Introduction 
The techniques used to solve difficult combinatorial optimization problems have 
evolved from constructive algorithms to local search techniques, and finally to popu-
lation-based algorithms. In recent years, technological advances have enabled devel-
opment development of various parallel and distributed versions of the population 
based methods. At the same time, as a result of convergence of many technologies 
within computer science such as object-o riented programming, distributed computing 
and artificial life, the agent technology has emerged. An agent is understood here as 
any piece of software that is designed to use intelligence to automatically carry out an 
assigned task, mainly retrieving and delivering information.  
Paradigms of the population-based methods and multiple agent systems have been 
during mid nineties integrated within the concept of the asynchronous team of agents 
(A-Team). A-Team is a multi agent architecture, which has been proposed in several 
papers of S.N. Talukdar and co-authors [1], [2], [3], [4].  
The middleware platforms supporting implementation of A-Teams, is represented 
by the JADE-Based A-Team environment (JABAT). Its different versions were

Experimental Investigation of the Synergetic Effect Produced by Agents 161 
proposed in [5], [6] and [7]. The JABAT middleware was built with the use of JADE 
(Java Agent Development Framework), a software framework proposed by TILAB 
[8]. JABAT complies with the requirements of the next generation A-Teams which 
are portable, scalable and in conformity with the FIPA standards. JABAT produces 
solutions to optimization problems using a set of optimizing agents, each representing 
an improvement algorithm. The process of solving a single task (i.e. the problem 
instance) consists of several steps. At first the initial population of solutions is gener-
ated. Individuals forming the initial population are, at the following computation 
stages, improved by independently acting agents, thus increasing chances for reaching 
the global optimum. Finally, when the stopping criterion is met, the best solution in 
the population is taken as the result.  
In this paper we investigate experimentally the synergetic effect produced by 
agents solving together instances of the Euclidean planar travelling salesman problem. 
It is assumed that agents work together within a JABAT-implemented A-Team. The 
goal of the paper is to establish the existence of such synergetic effect and, if possible, 
to discover some rules for selecting and composing an A-Team with a view to support 
the design of A-Teams with a synergetic effect feature present. The research is  
motivated by an absence of such rules in the literature-reported cases on the A-Team 
engineering. 
The paper is constructed as follows: Section 2 describes the implementation of the 
A-Team designed to solve instances of the Euclidean planar travelling salesman prob-
lem, Section 3 gives details of the experiment settings and experiment plan and  
Section 4 contains a discussion of the experiment results. Finally some conclusions 
and suggestions for future research are drawn. 
2   A-Team Implementation 
2.1   Problem Formulation 
The Euclidean planar travelling salesman pr oblem (EPTSP) is a particular case of the 
general TSP.  EPTSP can be formulated as follows: given n cities (points) in the plane 
and their Euclidean distances, the problem is to find the shortest TSP-tour, i.e. a 
closed path visiting each of the n cities exactly once.  
2.2   A-Team Working Strategy 
The process of solving a single task in JABAT is defined by a working strategy un-
derstood as a set of rules responsible for the process of maintaining the common 
memory. The common memory contains a population of solutions called individuals. 
All individuals are feasible solutions of the instance to be solved.  
The considered A-Teams implemented using the JABAT environment follow the 
working strategy in which: 
− All individuals in the initial population of solutions are generated randomly.   
− Selection of individuals for improvement is a random move.

162 P. J ędrzejowicz and I. Wierzbowska 
− Returning individual replaces the first found worse individual. If a worse individ-
ual can not be found within a certain number of reviews (review is understood as 
a search for the worse individual after an improved solution is returned) then the 
worst individual in the common memory is replaced by the randomly generated 
one representing a feasible solution.  
− Computation time is arbitrarily set in advance.  
2.3   Optimizing Agents 
Among several types of agents performing administration, maintenance, communica-
tion and optimization tasks which are standardized in JABAT, only optimizing agents 
directly influence the quality of individuals (i.e. solutions) stored in the common 
memory. Individuals from the common memory are selected in accordance with the 
current working strategy and forwarded for improvement to the independently run-
ning optimizing agents. Such an agent attempts to improve the received solution and, 
subsequently, resends it to the common memory.   
In the reported research there are five types of optimizing agents, each of them at-
tempts to improve the initial solution or solutions executing utmost 100 random 
moves. The first encountered improvement stops this process. The random moves 
employed by the agents are as follows: 
− Simple exchange (Ex2) – deletes two random edges from the input solution thus 
breaking the tour under improvement into two disconnected paths and reconnects 
them in the other possible way, reversing one path.  
− Triple exchange (Ex3) – deletes three random edges from the input solution thus 
breaking the tour under improvement into three disconnected paths. These paths 
can be reconnected in two other possible ways. Algorithm chooses the best of the 
resulting tours. 
− Recombination1 (R1) – there are two input solutions. A subpath from one of 
them is randomly selected. In the next step it is supplemented with edges from 
the second solution. If this happens to be  impossible the procedure constructs an 
edge connecting endpoint of the sub path with the closest point in the second in-
put solution not yet in the resulting tour.  
− Recombination2 (R2) – there are two input solutions. A sub path from one of 
them is randomly selected. In the next step it is supplemented by the remaining 
points in a sequence taken from the second solution.  
− Mutation (M) – two randomly selected points from the input solution are directly 
connected. This subpath is supplemented with edges as in R1.  If this happens to 
be impossible the procedure constructs an edge connecting endpoint of the sub-
path with the closest remaining point from the initial solution.   
3   Computational Experiment Settings 
Instances used in the reported experiment come from TSPLIB – a library of sample 
instances for the TSP [9]. The following instances have been used: pr76 (76 cities), 
pr152 (152), pr226 (226), pr299 (299) and pr439 (439).

Experimental Investigation of the Synergetic Effect Produced by Agents 163 
In each experiment run 10 optimizing agents have been employed. To identify and 
evaluate synergetic effect of different agents working together six A-Team architec-
tures with different combinations of optimizing agents have been tested. Five  
A-Teams have been constructed from the homogenous agents of each kind and one 
Team included all implemented optimization agents. The resulting A-Teams are  
further on referred to using the following notation:  
− Ex2 consisting of 10 Ex2 type agents 
− Ex3 consisting of 10 Ex3 type agents 
− M consisting of 10 M type agents  
− R1 consisting of 10 R1 type agents  
− R2 consisting of 10 R2 type agents  
− All consisting of 2 Ex2 type agents plus 2  Ex3,  2 M, 2 R1 and 2 R2 type (in total 
10 agents) 
For each problem instance and for each of the six considered A-Teams calculations 
have been carried-out for several variants of the common memory size from the inter-
val of (2 – 15) individuals.  The remaining settings included:  
− Maximum number of the allowed reviews on returning of individuals  – 5 
− Termination condition - 10 minutes calculation time  
Experiment has been carried out on the cluster Holk of the Tricity Academic  
Computer Network built of 256 Intel Itanium 2 Dual Core with 12 MB L3 cache 
processors with Mellanox InfiniBand interconnections with 10Gb/s bandwidth.  
4   Computational Experiment Results 
For each instance, each A-Team kind (i.e. th e considered combination of agent types) 
and each considered population size, the results  - in terms of computation error - have 
been averaged over not less than six runs. Computation errors have been calculated in 
relation to the optimum results known from the TSPLIB. 
On average, the computation error produced by the All A-Team is smaller than av-
erage errors generated by A-Teams composed of the homogenous agents, as it can be 
seen in Fig. 1. All A-Team remains a winner for all the investigated common memory 
sizes as shown in Fig. 2. The worst performer remains R2 team which results do not 
even fit to the scale used to draw Fig. 2. 
Tab. 1 shows for which instances the considered A-Teams achieved the smallest 
average computation error averaged over  all considered common memory size. 
Again, the A-Team constructed from heterogeneous agents gives the best results in 
majority of cases.  
It has been also decided to gain some insight on how the composition of agents 
within an A-Team influences the overall A-Team performance. This has been done 
through elimination of the worst performing optimization agents from the All A-Team 
and, at the same time, adding some good performers. In Fig. 3 the results of such an 
approach are shown for the case of the pr226 instance and the population (i.e. com-
mon memory) size set to 5. The smallest com putation error has been achieved by the

164 P. J ędrzejowicz and I. Wierzbowska 
56,3%
28,2%
293,9%
15,7% 17,8% 17,9%
0%
50%
100%
150%
200%
250%
300%
Ex3 R1 R2 All Ex2 M
eroor
 
Fig. 1. Average computation errors calculated for each of the considered A-Teams 
10,00%
25,00%
40,00%
55,00%
70,00%
1 4 7 10 13 16
population size
error
Ex3
R1
All
Ex2
M
 
Fig. 2. Computation errors generated by the respective A-Teams for different common memory 
sizes averaged over all considered instances

Experimental Investigation of the Synergetic Effect Produced by Agents 165 
Table 1.  Number of experiment runs where the average computation error produced by an  
A-Team of the given kind has been smaller than such errors achieved by other kinds of the 
investigated A-Teams 
 Ex3 R1 R2 All Ex2 M 
pr76 0 2 4 2 0 0 
pr152 0 0 0 7 0 1 
pr226 0 0 0 7 0 0 
pr299 2 2 0 1 0 3 
pr439 0 0 0 3 5 0 
Total 2 4 4 20 5 4 
  % 5% 10% 10% 51% 13% 10%
 
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
4,5%
5,0%
5,5%
6,0%
3 x Ex3
3 x R1
3 x Ex2
3 x M
4 x R1
4 x M
4 x Ex2
6 x M
6 x Ex2
12 x Ex2
error
 
Fig. 3.  Average computation error for the different A-Team compositions (instance pr226, 
population size 5) 
A-Team consisting of 12 agents including 4 of each type from R1, M and Ex2 and all 
of the R2 type agents removed. The R2 A-Team performance with respect to the  
discussed problem instance amounts to over 600% error as compared with the optimal 
solution. The remaining A-Team types performed much better which is shown  
in Fig. 4. 
Fig. 5 and 6 show similarly calculated error curves with respect to problem  
instances pr76 and pr439, which are, respectively, the smallest and the biggest inves-
tigated. For the pr439 instance and the common memory size set to 5, the best per-
forming A-Team type is All. However, for the larger sizes of the common memory 
better results are achieved by the Ex2 A-Team. This can be contributed to the fact that 
Ex2 local search optimization procedure converges faster at the beginning of compu-
tations. Increased size of the common memory together with the constraint

166 P. J ędrzejowicz and I. Wierzbowska 
10,0%
20,0%
30,0%
40,0%
50,0%
60,0%
70,0%
80,0%
90,0%
100,0%
110,0%
1 4 7 1 01 31 6
population size
error
Ex3
R1
All
Ex2
M
 
Fig. 4. Different A-Teams average computation error for the pr226 instance 
0,3%
0,8%
1,3%
1,8%
2,3%
2,8%
0369 1 2 1 5
population size
error
Ex3
R2
R3
All
Ex2
M
 
Fig. 5. Computation error curves for the problem instance pr76

Experimental Investigation of the Synergetic Effect Produced by Agents 167 
10,0%
30,0%
50,0%
70,0%
90,0%
110,0%
130,0%
0 3 6 9 12 15 18
population size
error
Ex3
R2
R3
All
Ex2
M
 
Fig. 6. Computation error curves for the problem instance pr439 
100000
300000
500000
0 100 200 300 400 500
time (in ms)
cost
All
Ex2
 
Fig. 7. Computation time versus cost (the length of the best tour) for All and Ex2 A-Teams and 
the for problem instance pr439

168 P. J ędrzejowicz and I. Wierzbowska 
imposed on the time allowed for the computation make it difficult for the All A-Team 
to reach, within the allowed time span, the state where the synergetic effect would 
appear. This finding is reinforced in case of the smallest problem instance (i.e. pr76) 
where All is outperformed by all homogenous A-Teams for the common memory 
sizes between 5 and 15 individuals.  
The existence of certain computation time gap during which the expected syner-
getic effect of the heterogeneous group of agents working together in the A-Team 
does not appear, is confirmed by plotting computation time versus cost (goal function 
value). This is shown in Fig. 7 for the two best performing A-Teams All and Ex2. 
5   Conclusions 
The presented research has confirmed that constructing an A-Team from heterogene-
ous optimizing agents might result in achieving a synergetic effect and thus increasing 
a quality of the computation results.  In case of the investigated Euclidean planar 
travelling salesman problem, where several A-Teams have been built using relatively 
low quality optimizing agents, a synergetic effect has, on average, appeared for all 
sizes of the common memory. For the larger problem instances such an effect to  
appear requires some computation-time lag. Small size instances can however be 
effectively solved using a number of homogenous local-search optimizing agents 
working together for a certain time, which would be shorter than the time required by 
a heterogeneous A-Tem to achieve a comparable quality. All these findings refer to 
the working strategy used in the experiment where escaping from the local optima has 
been based on inserting to the common memo ry during the computation process some 
random solutions from time to time.  
The experiment results do not allow to draw any general rules for construction of 
an A-Team from heterogeneous optimizing agents with a view to achieving a syner-
getic effect even for a specific problem type. Future research will focus on introduc-
ing different working strategy schemes and evaluating their effect on computation 
results and a synergetic effect, which might be helpful in identifying more general 
observations.  
Acknowledgments. Calculations have been performed in the Academic Computer 
Centre TASK in Gdańsk. 
References 
1. Talukdar, S.N., Pyo, S.S., Giras, T.: Asynchronous Procedures for Parallel Processing. IEEE 
Trans. on PAS PAS-102(11), 3652–3659 (1983) 
2. Talukdar, S.N., de Souza, P., Murthy, S.: Organizations for Computer-Based Agents. Engi-
neering Intelligent Systems 1(2), 56–69 (1993) 
3. Talukdar, S., Baerentzen, L., Gove, A., de Souza, P.: Asynchronous teams: cooperation 
schemes for autonomous agents. Journal of Heuristics 4(4), 295–332 (1998) 
4. Talukdar, S.N.: Collaboration rules for autono mous software agents. Decision Support  
Systems 24, 269–278 (1999)

Experimental Investigation of the Synergetic Effect Produced by Agents 169 
5. Jędrzejowicz, P., Wierzbowska, I.: JADE-Based A-Team Environment. In: Alexandrov, 
V.N., van Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2006. LNCS, vol. 3993, 
pp. 719–726. Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 
6. Barbucha, D., Czarnowski, I., J ędrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak, E., Wierzbowska, I.: JADE-
Based A-Team as a Tool for Implementing Population-Based Algorithms. In: Chen, Y., 
Abraham, A. (eds.) Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, IDSA, Jinan Shandong 
China, pp. 144–149. IEEE, Los Alamitos (2006) 
7. Czarnowski, I., J ędrzejowicz, P., Wierzbowska, I.: A-Team Middleware on a Cluster.  
In: Håkansson, A., Nguyen, N.T., Hartung, R.L., Howlett, R.J., Jain, L.C. (eds.) KES-
AMSTA 2009. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNAI), vol. 5559, pp. 764–772. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
8. Bellifemine, F., Caire, G., Poggi, A., Rimassa, G.: JADE. A White Paper, Exp. 3(3), 6–20 
(2003) 
9. Library of sample instances for the TSP,  
http://comopt.ifi.uni-heidelberg.de/software/TSPLIB95/

Multidimentional Self-organization for Online
Time-Constrained Vehicle Routing Problems
Besma Zeddini1 and Mahdi Zargayouna2
1 University of Le Havre, LMAH Laboratory
25 rue Philippe Lebon
76063 Le Havre Cedex, France
2 INRETS Institute, Gretia laboratory
Building “Descartes II”, 2 rue de la Butte Verte
93160 Noisy le Grand Cedex, France
besma.zeddini@ens.univ-evry.fr, zargayouna@inrets.fr
Abstract. Vehicle Routing problems are highly complex problems for
which diﬀerent Artiﬁcial Intelligence techniques have been used. In this
paper, we propose two agent-oriented self-organization models for the
dynamic version of the problem with time windows. The ﬁrst model
relies on a spatial representation, and the second is based on a space-time
representation of the agents’ action zones, which are able to maintain a
good distribution of the vehicles on the environment. This distribution
provides better results than traditional methods by allowing the agents
to take their decisions while anticipating future changes in the system’s
parameters.
1 Introduction
Severalo perational distribution problems, such as the de liveries ofg oods to
stores, the routing ofs c hool buses, the distribution of newspapers andm ail etc.
are instantiations of NP-Hard theoretical problems called the VehicleR outing
Problems (VRP). In i ts originalv ersion, a VRPi sam u lti-vehicle Traveling
SalesmanP roblem: there exists a certain number of nodes to be visited once by
a limited number of vehicles.T he objective ist o ﬁndas e t of vehicles’ routes
that minimizes the total distance traveled.B esides theirp r a c tical usefulness, the
VRP and its extensionsa r ec h allenging optimization problems with academic
stimulating issues. One oft h em ost widely studied variant of the pr oblem is
the time (and capacity) constrained version: the VehicleR outing Problem with
Time Windows (VRPTW henceforth), in which the requests to be handled are
nots imply nodes, but customers.F ore a c hc u s tomer, the following information
are provided: the concerned node, two temporal bounds betweenw hich he desires
to be visited andaq u antity( number ofg oods to receive,n umber ofp e r sonst o
transport, etc.). The performance criteria of VRPTW solutionsa r ein general
(followingt his order): i) T he number of vehicles used, ii) the total distance
traveled, iii) the totalw aitingt ime.T he VRP andt h eVRPTW can be divided
into two sets: staticp roblems andd ynamicp roblems.T he distinction between
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 170–179, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Multidimentional Self-organization for Online Time-Constrained VRP 171
these two categories relies traditionally on the knowledge (staticp roblem)o r
the ignorance (dynamicp roblem) before the start oft h esolvingp rocess ofa ll
the customers that havet o be visited.T he operational problems are rarely fully
statica nd wec an reasonably say that today as t a tics ystem cannot meet the
mobilityn eeds of the users.
Wer ely on the multi-agent paradigm fors olvingt h edynamic VRPTW. An
agent isas oftware system, that iss ituated in some environmenta ndt h a tisa ble
to apply autonomous actionst o satisfyi ts goals [15], anda MAS isa loosely
coupled network of agents that interact to solvep roblems that are beyondt h e
individual capabilities ork nowledge ofe a c hone [13]. A multi-agentm odeling of
the dynamic VRPTW isr elevantf ort h efollowingr e a sons.F irst, since it’sah a r d
problem, choosingad e sign allowingf ort h edistribution ofc omputation can be a
solution to propose short answer times to customers requests.S econd,w ith the
technological developments,i t isr e a sonablet o consider vehicles with onboard
calculation capabilities.I n thisc ontext, the problem is, de facto, distributed and
necessitates an adapted modelingt o take proﬁt oft h eonboard equipments of
the vehicles.F i nally, the consideration ofam u lti-agentp oint of view allowst o
envision new measures,n ew heuristics,n ote nvisaged by centralized approaches.
The MAS that wep ropose in thisp a p e rsimulate a distributed version oft h e
so-called“insertion heuristics”. Insertion heuristics are methods that consist in in-
sertingt h ec u s tomers followingt h eira p p e a r ance order in the routes oft h evehi-
cles.T he vehiclec hosen toi nsert the considered customer ist h eonet h a th a sto
make the minimal detour tov isith im.S everalM A Si nthe literature haveb e en
proposed to distribute insertion heuristics, but very few propose new measures for
the insertion cost ofac u s tomer in the route ofa vehicle, as an alternativet o the
traditional measure of its incurred detour.I nthe present work,w ed o propose two
new measures,i nthe context oft wo new self-organization models.T hey are based
on as p a c eand on as p a c e-time representation oft h eVehicle agents’ action zones
(the zone inside which all vehicle’sa c tionst a k eplace). The objective ist o allow
the MAS to self-adapt exhibitinga n equilibrated distribution of its Vehicle agents,
andt o decrease this way the number of vehicles mobilized to servet h ec u s tomers.
The remainder oft hisp a p e ris structured as follows.I n section 2,w ed iscuss
previous proposalsf ort h edynamic VRPTW w.r.t our approach.I nthe section 3,
wed e t ail the two modelsa nd the use of new measures fort h einsertion decisions
oft h e vehicles.W er e port on our experimental results in section 4a ndt h en
conclude with a few remarks.
2 Related Work
Exact approaches cannot meetoperational settings of VRPTW, andu pon the rel-
atively small set ofb enchmarkingp roblems of [12]-5 6 problems of 100 Euclidean
customers1 each,o n l y45 haveak nown optimal solution up until today[ 9 ] .H o w -
ever,interested readersof optimizationapproachescan refer to, e.g.[ 6 ]foras u rvey.
1 Euclidean customers have cartesian coordinates, and the distance and the le travel
times between each pair of customers are calculated following the Euclidean metric.

172 B. Zeddini and M. Zargayouna
In fact, most of the proposedsolution methods are heuristic or metaheuristicm e t h-
ods,w hich provide goodr e s ults in non-exponential times, and which havep r e-
sented goodr e s ults with benchmark problems.F or instance,l arge-neighborhood
localsearch[10], simulatedannealing[1],evolutivest rat egies[8] anda ntcolonies[3]
present the best performances with staticp roblems (where the setoft r ansport re-
quests isk nownap r i o r i). Fora n extensives u rveyo ft h eliterature fort h eVRPTW
approaches, the reader is invited to refer to, e.g.[ 5 ] .
Generally speaking, most oft h eworks dealing with the dynamic VRPTW are
more or less direct adaptations ofs t a ticm e t hods.U pon the staticm e t hods,i nser-
tion heuristics are the most widely adapted in ad ynamice nvironment.I nsertion
heuristics are,i n their originalv ersion, greedy algorithms,i n the sense that the
decision toi nsert a given customer in the route ofa vehicle is irrevocable.T hey
are also combined with metaheuristics toi mprovet h eq u alityo ft h esolutions.
The advantage ofu sing insertion heuristics is that they are intuitivea ndf a s t.
However,w hen they are applied in ad ynamicc ontext, theirs olvingp rocess is
saidt o be short-sighted.I ndeed, the system doesn’tk now which customers will
appear once it has ass igned the known customers to the vehicles; ande veni f
wec ouldh avea no ptimal assignmenta nds c h e d uling oft h eknown customers, a
new comingc u s tomer couldm a k et h eolda s signments u b-optimal, which would
-i n the worst case -n ecessitate a wholer e computation ofa ll the routes.
Most oft h em ulti-agent approaches fort h edynamic VRPTW are grounded,
at least partially, on insertion heuristics.I n[ 14] and in [7], the authors propose
am ulti-agenta r c hitecture to solves everalv ersions oft h eVRP. The principle is
the same: distribute ani nsertion heuristic, followed by ap ost-optimization step.
MARS[ 2] modelsac ooperatives c h e d uling in am a ritime shippingc ompany in
the form ofam u lti-agents ystem.T he solution to the global schedulingp roblem
emerges fromt h elocal decisions.T he system uses an extension oft h eContract
Net Protocol [11] ands howst h a titc an be used forh avingg ood initial solutions
to complex problems of tasks assignment.F romap r otocol anda n architecture
point of view, our system sticks with the multi-agents ystems weh ave just de-
scribed, since wep ropose a distributed version of insertion heuristics.H o wever,
in these proposals,n o neh avef ocused on the redeﬁnition oft h einsertion cost of
ac u s tomer.T he traditionali nsertion cost ofac u s tomer in the route ofa vehicle
isb a s e don the incurred detour oft h evehicle.Wep ropose two newi nsertion cost
measures, focused on the space ands p a c e-time coverage oft h et r ansportation
network by the vehicles. Our goali st o counterbalance the short vision oft h e
traditional measures, by privileginga ni nsertion process that is future-centered.
3 Multidimensional Self-organization Models
The optimization oft h econventional criteria oft h eVRPTW (number of vehicles
andt otal distance)l eads to the appearance ofu ncovered areas because oft h eir
low density. Indeed, the fact that wed e alw ith a dynamica nd nondeterminis-
ticp roblem canl ead to the appearance oft wo diﬀerent but non independent
phenomena.T he ﬁrst ist h econcentration of vehicles in some zones which are

Multidimentional Self-organization for Online Time-Constrained VRP 173
more attractivea ndm ayl ead to the second phenomena,w hich ist h e lack of
service elsewhere.T he idea behind our self-organization models ist h a twhen the
positioning of vehicles ism a d es u c ha sto cover as much territory as possible, the
risk ofc u s tomers whose demand isu nsatisﬁed, andt h eobligation to mobilize
newv ehicles to servet h e m, decreases.T he choices wem a k eto solvet hisp roblem
ist o use the multi-agent paradigm coupled with the insertion heuristics.I n this
context,w eh ave only one lever to change the system’sb e h avior,w hich ist h e
wayi nw hich theVehicle agents calculate the insertion cost ofac u s tomer.T hese
calculation methods are two dimensional: spatial ands p a tiotemporal. The two
self-organization modelst h a twep ropose havet h eobjective ofm inimizingt h e
number ofu s e dvehicles,w hile keeping the use ofa “pure”i nsertion heuristics,
i.e.w ithout any further improvements orp ost-optimization.
3.1 Spatial Self-organization Model
Our systems are composed ofad ynamics e tof agents which interact to solvet h e
dynamic VRPTW. A solution consists ofas e t of vehicles routes, each route con-
sists ofas e q u ence ofc u s tomers with theira s sociated visitt ime.W ed e ﬁnet wo
categories of agents. Customer agents,w hich representu s e r soft h esystem (per-
sons org oods) and Vehicle agents.We assume that thereisa n access pointt o the
system (Web server, GUI, simulator, etc.) which veriﬁes the correctness ofc u s-
tomers requests(existing node,v alidt ime windows, etc.) before to create the cor-
responding Customer agents. Once created, a Customer agenta nnounces itselft o
all the Vehicle agents oft h eMAS. Each Vehicle agents ends ano ﬀer to the Cus-
tomer agent with a corresponding insertion cost.T he Customer agentc hooses the
Vehicle agent with thelower cost.F i nally,the chosenVehicle agent inserts the cus-
tomer in its route. Followingt his description, the Customer agentc hooses between
several Vehicle agents theone with the minimal proposed insertion cost.T he sys-
tems that are basedon thish e u risticu s eg enerally the measureof Solomon [12] as
ani nsertion cost.T hism e a s u r econsists in insertingt h ec u s tomer which has the
minimali mpact on the general cost oft h evehicle (which isg enerally function of
the vehicle’s incurred detour). Thism e a s u r eiss implea ndt h emost intuitive but
has a serious drawback, since the insertion of the currentc u s tomer might result
in makingt h einsertion ofag r e a tnumber of future customers infeasible,w ith the
current number of vehicles.I ts problem ist h a titg enerates vehicles’ planst h a ta r e
very constrained in time ands p a c e,i .e. planst h a toﬀer a few possibilities of in-
sertion between each pair ofa djacentp lanned customers.A sac onsequence, the
appearance of new customers might lead to the creation ofa newv ehiclet o serve
them.T hrough the modeling of Vehicle agents’ action zones,w ep ropose a new
way to compute the customer’s insertion cost in the route ofa vehicle, anda new
choice criterion betweenv ehicles fort h einsertion ofag iven customer.Wep ropose
a new methodt h a tallowst h esystem to choose theVehicle agent“which decrease
in the probability to participate in future insertions ism inimal”,to servet h enew
customer.T he logic of our models isd iﬀerentf romt h et r a ditional models,w hich
focus on the increase oft h et r aveled distance,n eglectingt h eimpact of the current
insertion decision on future insertion possibilities.

174 B. Zeddini and M. Zargayouna
The objective oft h es p a tial self-organization modeli st o allow the special-
ization oft h es ystem’s vehicles to zones whilem aintainingt h eb e s tpossible
geographical coverage oft h enetwork.T hus,w ed e ﬁnea c tion zones on the trans-
portation network, tow hich thevehicles are attached.T he attachment of vehicles
to theirz ones is note ncoded in the vehicleb e h avior, but ith a san eﬀect on how
they calculate theirc u s tomers insertion costs.T hisc omputation shoulde nsure
that a Vehicle agentp lans its route so that it ise ncouraged to stayi ni ts zone.
Each zone isd e ﬁned by as e tof nodes andab a rycentre.
Deﬁnition 1 (Spatial Action Zone)
Let G =( N,A ) be the graph representing the transportation network, with a set
of nodes N ={(ni)},i ={0, ... ,m} (node n0 is the depot) and a set of arcs
A ={(ni,n j)|ni ∈ N,n j ∈ N,n i ⁄= nj}. Let the costs matrix C ={(Cij)} of
size m×m (the arc (ni,n j) has a travel time ofCij). We deﬁne the spatial zone
ζ =( Nζ,Aζ) as a subgraph of G.
The barycentre ofaz onec orresponds to the node that ist h eclosest to all other
nodes in the zone.
Deﬁnition 2 (barycentre of a Zone). The barycentre of zoneζ is a noden∗ζ
of Nζ that minimizes∑
y∈Nζ
dn∗ζ,y.
Ata ny point in time, each Vehicle agenth a sadistance from its action zone.T his
distance depends on the customers alreadyi nserted in its route.I t isc omputed
such as toi nclude a pe nalty β ift h evehicle’sr oute integrates nodes that are
outside its zone.I ndeed,i ft h enode is inside the vehicle’sz one,i ts distance from
the barycentre oft h ea c tion zoner e m ainsu nchanged. Otherwise,i ts distance is
multiplied by af a c tor β which isas ystem parameter.
Deﬁnition 3 (Vehicle Distance from its Zone)
The distance of a vehicle v from its zone ζv at a given moment is equal to the
average distance of the nodes in its route from the barycentre ofζv:
dv,ζv =
∑
nv ∈Nodes(v) dnv,n∗ζ
card(Nodes(v))
with
∀c∈ N,d nv,c =
{dnv,c if nv ∈ zv
β× dnv,c else
Nodes(v) represents the nodes of the Vehicle agent’s route and card(Nodes(v))
is the number of nodes in Nodes(v).F i n a l l y ,β is the penalty imposed to the
vehicle distance, if its route integrates nodes which are outsidev’s zone.
The oﬀer that aVehicle agentp roposes to ac u s tomer for its insertion ise q u al to
the oldd istance oft h evehiclef rom its zonem inus its newo ne,i f ith a dtoi nsert
the customer.T he bigger β is, the more the vehicles are organized so that they
stayi n theirz ones.T he deﬁnition ofg eographical zones of vehicles ist r e a t e d
as a partitioning graph problem and is left out oft h es cope oft hisp a p e r.W e
suppose that the deﬁ nition oft h e s ezones isas ystem parameter,w hich ist h e
responsibilityo fa n expert.

Multidimentional Self-organization for Online Time-Constrained VRP 175
3.2 Space-Time Self-organization Model
Eveni f ita llows a better spat ial coverage oft h e network, the spat ial self-
organization model has two majord r awbacks.F irst,i t assumes ap r i o r igeo-
graphical segmentation. Wi th the abse nce ofd a t a on previous cust omers
demands, thist a s kr e q uires a great calibration eﬀort to specify the most eﬃcient
zones’ segmentation. Second,i td oesn’t incorporate the temporal dimension of
the problem, since a vehiclem ight notb ea blet o serveac u s tomer eveni f it is
located in its zone, because oft h etime constraints.I n the following,w ep ropose
toi ntegrate the temporal dimension in the Vehicle agents’ action zones andt o
eliminate any ap r i o r ideﬁnition oft h e s ezones.
Fig. 1. Feasible insertion
Consider a Vehicle agent v that has an empty route.I no rder fort his agentt o
be ablet oi nsert a new customer c - described by: n a node,[ e, l] at ime window,
s as e rvice time, and q aq u antity- l has to be bige nough to allow v to be in
n without violating its time constraints.M ore precisely, the currentt ime t, plus
the travel time between the depota nd n has to be less ore q u al to l (cf.F igure 1).
Startingf romt his observation, wed e ﬁnet h es p a c e-time action zone ofa Vehicle
agenta st h ep otential customers that satisfy thisc onstraint. To illustrate the
action zones andt h eird ynamics,w ep r e s entt h eversion of the measure that is
related to an Euclidean problem,i .e.w here travel times are computed following
the Euclidean metric.T he following paragraphs deta il the measure as well as
its dynamics.
The Computation of Action Zones. In the Euclidean case, the transporta-
tion network isap lane, andt h et r avel times between two points i (described
by( xi,y i)) and j (described by( xj,y j)) ise q u al to
√
(xi− xj)2 +( yi− yj)2.
Therefore,i fa vehicle is in i at the m oment t,i tc annotb e in j earlier than
ti +
√
(xi− xj)2 +( yi− yj)2.W ec an compute at any time, from the currentp o-
sition ofa vehicle, the set oft riples (x, y, t)w here itc an be in the future.I ndeed,
consideringap lane with anX -axis in [xmin,xmax] anda Y-axis in [ymin,y max],
the set ofs p a c e-time positions ist h es e tofp oints in t h ec u b ed elimited by
[xmin,xmax],[ymin,y max] and [e0,l0]( recall that e0 and l0 are the schedu ling

176 B. Zeddini and M. Zargayouna
horizon anda r et h eminimal andm aximalv alues fort h etime windows). Con-
sider a vehicle in the depot (x0,y0) at t0.T he set ofp oints (x, y, t) that are
accessibleb y this vehiclea r ed e s c ribed by the following inequality:
√
(x− x0)2 +( y− y0)2≤ (t− t0)
The (x, y, t) satisfyingt his inequality are those that are positioned inside the cone
C of vertex( x0,y0,t0) and with the equation
√
(x− x0)2 +( y− y0)2 =( t− t0)
(c.f Fig. 2 (left)).
Fig. 2. Initial Action Zone (left) and after the insertion of c2 (right)
Thisc oner e p r e s ents the action zone ofa Vehicle agent,w ith an empty route,
in the Euclidean case.I tr e p r e s ents all the possibles p a c e-time positionst h a tt his
Vehicle agent isa blet o have in the future.
Weu s et h ea c tion zone oft h eVehicle agents when a Customer agenth a sto
choose between several Vehicle agents for its insertion. Weh avet o be ablet o com-
pare the action zones ofd iﬀerent Vehicle agents.T odo so, wep ropose to quantify
it, by computingt h evolume oft h econeC representingt h ef u t u r epossiblep osi-
tions oft h evehicle:
Vo l u m e(C)= 1
3× π× (l0− e0)3
This ist h eq u antiﬁcation oft h e initial action zone ofa ny new Vehicle agent
joiningt h eMAS. When a new Customer agenta p p e a r s, a Vehicle agentc om-
putes its new action zone, the cost that itp roposes to the Customer agent is
the diﬀerence betweeni ts olda c tion zonea nd its newo ne.T he new action zone
computation isd e t ailed in the following paragraph.
Dynamics of the Action Zones. Consider a cust omer c2 (ofc oordinates
(x2,y2) and with a time window [e2,l2]) that joinst h esystem, and suppose that
v ist e m porarily the only Vehicle agentt h a tc an serve c2 andh a san empty route.
The agent v has to deduce its new space-time action zone,i .e. the space-time
area that itc an still reach without violatingt h etime constraints of c2.T he new
action zonea nswers the f ollowingq u e s tions:“ if v had to be in (x2,y2) at l2,
where would ith aveb e en before?A nd if ith a dto be there at e2 where would

Multidimentional Self-organization for Online Time-Constrained VRP 177
itb ea f t e re2 + s2 ?”. The triples (x, y, t)w here the Vehicle agentc an be before
visiting c2 are described by the inequality[ a], andt h et riples (x, y, t)w here he
can be after visiting c2 are describe by the inequality[ b].
√
(x− x2)2 +( y− y2)2≤ (l2− (t)) [ a]√
(x− x2)2 +( y− y2)2≤ (t− (e2 + s2)) [ b]
The new action zone is illustrated by the Fig. 2 (right): the new measure consists
in the intersection oft h e initial coneC with the u nion oft h et wo new cones
described by the inequalities [a] and [b]( denoted respectively byC1 andC2). The
new measure oft h ea c tion zone ise q u al to the volume oft h eintersection ofC
with the union ofC1 andC2.
The cost oft h einsertion ofac u s tomer in the route ofa vehicle ise q u al to the
measure associated with the olda c tion zone oft h evehiclem inus the measure of
the new action zone, after the insertion oft h ec u s tomer.T he quantity measured
represents the space-time positions that the vehiclec annoth avea nymore,i f it
had toi nsert thisc u s tomer in its route.T he retained Vehicle agentt ov isita
given customer ist h e onef or which the insertion oft h ec u s tomer causes less
loss in its space-time action zone.T hisc orresponds to choosingt h evehiclet h a t
looses the minimal possibilities to be candidate for future customers.
4R e s u l t s
Marius M. Solomon [12] has created a set ofd iﬀerents t a ticp roblems fort h e
VRPTW. It is now admitted that these pr oblems are challenginga ndd iverse
enough to compare with enough conﬁdence the diﬀerentp roposed methods.I n
Solomon’sb enchmarks, six diﬀerents e t sofp roblems haveb e en deﬁned: C1, C2,
R1, R2, RC1 andR C 2.T he customers are geographically uniformly distributed
in the problems oft ype R, clustered in the problems oft ype C, andam ix of
customers uniformly distributed andc lustered isu s e din the problems oft ype
RC.T he problems oft ype 1 have narrow time windows (very few customers can
coexist in the same vehicle’sr oute) and the problems oft ype 2 have wide time
windows.F i nally,ac onstants e rvice time isa s sociated with each customer,w hich
ise q u al to1 0i n the problems oft ype R andR C, andt o9 0i n the problems of
type C.W ec hoose to use Solomon benchmarks,w hilef ollowingt h emodiﬁcation
proposed by[ 4] to make the problem dynamic.W eh ave implemented three MAS
with almos tt h es a m eb e h avior, the only diﬀerence concerns the measure used
by Vehicle agents to compute the insertion cost ofac u s tomer.F or the ﬁrst
implemented MAS, itr elies on the Solomon measure (noted Δ Distance), on
the space-time model fort h es e cond (noted Δ Space-Time) and on the spatial
model fort h et hird (noted Δ Space)2.W ec hoose to runo ur experiments with
2 After several test runs, we set the penalty β to 1.2 and the geographical zones to
four equal zones.

178 B. Zeddini and M. Zargayouna
the problems ofc lass R andC ,o ft ype 1, which are the instances that are very
constrained in time (narrow time windows). Our system isc oded in JAVAand
executed on a PC with a Core 2 Duo R© 2.77 GHZp rocessor,w ith 4 GBo fR AM.
Table 1. Results summary
Δ Distance
 Δ Space-Time
 Δ Space
Problem
 |Fleet|
 Distance
 |Fleet|
 Distance
 |Fleet|
 Distance
R1 25 customers
 64
 6372
 53
 6561
 58
 5732
C1 25 customers
 34
 3167
 31
 3152
 32
 3014
R1 50 customers
 107
 12036
 92
 12089
 101
 11307
C1 50 customers
 60
 6712
 53
 7093
 58
 6682
R1 100 customers
 181
 17907
 150
 17348
 164
 16680
C1 100 customers
 121
 16011
 108
 16512
 113
 15206
Table 1 summarizes the resu lts where wec onsider successively 25, 50 and
100 customers.T he results show, with the two classes ofp roblems, that the use
oft h es p a c e-time model mobilizes less vehicles than the spatial model, which
in turn behaves better tha n the traditional measure,w hatever the number of
considered customers.T hese results validate the intuition oft h em odelst h a t
consists ofm aximizingt h ef u t u r einsertion possibilities fora Vehicle agent. Once
thisr e s ult validated,i t is interestingt o check the results with respect to the total
distance traveled by all the vehicles.W ith respect t o thisc riterion, the space
model behaves better than the two others,w hile the behavior oft h es p a c e-time
modeli s less eﬃcient, since itg ives better resu lts for the pr oblems C1w ith
25 customers andR 1w ith 100 customers, but isd ominated by the traditional
measure fort h eothers.T he fact remainst h a tour results forb oth modelsp rovide
better results than the traditional heuristic, provided the primaryo bjective oft h e
problem,w hich ist o minimize the number of vehicles mobilized by the system.
5C o n c l u s i o n
In thisp a p e r,w eh avep roposed two agent-oriented self-organization modelsf or
the dynamic VRPTW based on the agents’ action zones.T he action zones of
the Vehicle agents reﬂect theirc overage oft h et r ansportation network.W eu s e
these action zones to reduce the short-sighted behavior oft r a ditional metrics.
By optimizingt h ecoverage oft h eenvironmentb y the Vehicle agents,o ur model
allowst h eMAS to self-adapt by exhibitinga n equilibrated distribution oft h e
vehicles, andt ol essen this way the number of vehicles mobilized to servet h e
customers. Our current works are oriented towards the consideration ofh istoric
data ofc u s tomers requests on the network nodes.T hese data ca n be used t o
weight the action zones oft h eVehicle agents, too ptimize theirp ositioning with
respect to the expected distribution oft h ec u s tomers’ demands.

Multidimentional Self-organization for Online Time-Constrained VRP 179
References
1. Czech, Z.J., Czarnas, P.: A parallel simulated annealing for the vehicle routing
problem with time windows. In: Proceedings of the 10th Euromicro Workshop on
Parallel, Distributed and Network-based Processing, Canary Islands, Spain, pp.
376–383 (2002)
2. Fischer, K., Muller, J., Pischel, M., Schier, D.: A model for cooperative transporta-
tion scheduling. In: Lesser, V.R., Gasser, L. (eds.) Proceedings of the First Inter-
national Conference on Multiagent Systems (ICMAS 1995), pp. 109–116. AAAI
Press / MIT Press, Menlo Park (1995)
3. Gambardella, L.M., Taillard, E.D., Agazzi, G.: MACS-VRPTW: A multiple ant
colony system for vehicle routing problems with time windows. In: Corne, D.,
Dorigo, M., Glover, F. (eds.) New Ideas in Optimization, pp. 63–76. McGraw-Hill,
London (1999)
4. Gendreau, M., Guertin, F., Potvin, J.Y., Taillard, E.D.: Parallel tabu search for
real-time vehicle routing and dispatching. Transportation Science 33(4), 381–390
(1999)
5. Golden, B., Raghavan, S., Wasil, E.: The vehicle routing problem, latest advances
and new challenges. Operations research/computer science interfaces, vol. 43.
Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
6. Jepsen, M., Petersen, B., Spoorendonk, S., Pisinger, D.: Subset-row inequalities
applied to the vehicle-routing problem with time windows. In: Operations Research,
vol. 56(2), pp. 497–511 (2008)
7. Kohout, R., Erol, K.: In-Time agent-based vehicle routing with a stochastic im-
provement heuristic. In: Proceedings of the sixteenth national conference on Arti-
ﬁcial intelligence and the eleventh Innovative applications of artiﬁcial intelligence
(AAAI 1999/IAAI 1999), pp. 864–869. AAAI Press, Menlo Park (1999)
8. Mester, D., Br ¨aysy, O.: Active guided evolution strategies for large scale vehicle
routing problems with time windows. Computers & Operations Research 32(6),
1593–1614 (2005)
9. Nagata, Y., Br¨aysy, O., Dullaert, W.: A penalty-based edge assembly memetic algo-
rithm for the vehicle routing problem with time windows. Computers & Operations
Research 37(4), 724–737 (2010)
10. Pisinger, D., Ropke, S.: A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems. Computers
& Operations Research 34(8), 2403–2435 (2007)
11. Smith, R.G.: The contract net protocol: High-level communication and control in
a distributed problem solver. IEEE Trans. on Comp. C-29(12), 1104–1113 (1980)
12. Solomon, M.: Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling with time window
constraints. Operations Research 15, 254–265 (1987)
13. Sycara, K.P.: Multiagent Systems. AI Magazine 19(2), 79–92 (1998)
14. Thangiah, S.R., Shmygelska, O., Mennell, W.: An agent architecture for vehicle
routing problems. In: Proceedings of the 2001 ACM symposium on Applied com-
puting SAC 2001, pp. 517–521. ACM Press, New York (2001)
15. Wooldridge, M., Jennings, N.R.: Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. Knowl-
edge Engineering Review 10(2), 115–152 (1995)

Cooperative Solution to the Vehicle
Routing Problem
Dariusz Barbucha
Department of Information Systems, Gdynia Maritime University
Morska 83, 81-225 Gdynia, Poland
barbucha@am.gdynia.pl
Abstract. Cooperative multi-agent systems are rapidly growing sub-
class of the multi-agent systems where autonomous components allow to
built and use several agent types acting in parallel while cooperatively
solving a task. Possible form of such cooperation may be based, for ex-
ample, on adaptive memory methods, where partial elements of good so-
lutions are stored and next combined to create new complete solutions.
Alternative possibility forms central memory approaches, where complete
elite solutions are exchanged among various heuristics. Moreover, cooper-
atively solving a task is often combined with learning mechanism, where
agents adapt their behavior to the new conditions of environment during
the process of solving the problem. The goal of the paper is to propose a
dedicated cooperative multi-agent system for solving the Vehicle Rout-
ing Problem with a reinforcement learning mechanism implemented in it.
Keywords: multi-agent systems, multi-agent learning, cooperative
problem solving, heuristics, vehicle routing problem.
1 Introduction
Last years, a number ofs igniﬁcant decentralized approaches fors olvingr e al-
worldp roblems haveb e en proposed.S ome oft h e mf all into the area ofs ys-
tems composed ofm ultiplea u tonomous components, called multi-agent systems
(MAS) [4]. Byemphasizing jointb e h avior of agents and interaction between them
to cooperatively solvet h et a s k sort o maximize utility, ani mportants u b class of
MAS can be distinguished - cooperative multi-agent systems (CMAS) [7].
Generally, two main classes ofc ooperation mechanisms are found in the lit-
erature, based on partial andc omplete solutions, respectively. Adaptive memory
methods [8] store partial elements ofg oods olutionsa ndc ombinet h e mto create
new complete solutionst h a ta r eimproved then by the cooperating threads. Cen-
tral memory approaches exchange complete elite solutionsa mong neighborhood
orp opulation based meta-heuristics [2].
One of the successful approaches to cooperative agent-based optimization be-
longingt o the central memory approaches ist h econcept ofa n asynchronous team
(A-Team)[ 9 ] ,where a collection ofs oftware agents cooperates to solveap r ob-
lem by dynamically evolvingt h epopulation ofs olutionss tored in the common
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 180–189, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Cooperative Solution to the Vehicle Routing Problem 181
memory. Each agente ncapsulates a particular problem-solvingm e t hod,w hich
usually is inspired byn atural phenomena including, fore xample, evolutionary
processes orp a r ticles warm optimization, as well as local search techniques like,
fore xample, tabu search.T his ise xpected that des igninga nA - Team results
in obtaininga n eﬀectivet ool fors olvingd iﬃcultc omputational problems.T he
groundp rinciple ofa synchronous teams rests on combininga lgorithms,w hich
alonec ouldb e inept fort h et a s k,i nto eﬀectivep roblem-solving organizations,
possibly creatingas ynergy eﬀect,i nw hich the combined eﬀect ofc ooperation
between agents isg r e a t e rt h an the sum oft h eir separate eﬀects.
Thisp a p e rp roposes a cooperativem ulti-agents ystem called c-JABAT (coop-
erative JADE-Based A-Team)w hich allowst o builta nd use several agentt ypes
acting in parallelw hilec ooperatively searchingf oras olution tov arious compu-
tationally hard optimization problems. c-JABAT isa n extended version oft h e
JABAT system,w hich,w ith success, has been developed by at e a mwith par-
ticipation oft h ea u t hor oft hisp a p e randu s e dfors olvings everalo ptimization
problems belongingt oN P -hard class,l ike fore xampleR e source Constrained
Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP), Traveling SalesmanP erson (TSP) and
VehicleR outing Problem (VRP) [1].
The proposed extended version oft h esystem focuses on implementation oft h e
reinforcement learningm e c h anism,w here agents’ behavior is adapted duringt h e
searchingp rocess.I t ise xpected that implementing such mechanism cani ncrease
the eﬀectiveness of the process andb rings olutionsc lose to the optimalo nes.T he
presented approach has beenv alidated on one oft h ewell known optimization
problem fromt r ansportation area -V ehicleR outing Problem.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.S ection 2 describes main
features of the proposed cooperativem ulti-agent approach.I n section 3 ani m-
plementation oft h esystem fors olvingt h evehicler outingp roblem isp r e s ented.
Section 4s howst h eplano ft h ecomputational experiment which has been car-
ried out in order tov alidate an eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach andr e-
ports on the obtained results.A ndﬁ nally, conclusions included in Section 5 end
the paper.
2P r e s e n t a t i o n o f J A B A T
2.1 Overview
JABAT environment isam iddleware supportingt h ec onstruction of the ded-
icated A-Team architectures used f ors olving varietyo fc omputationally hard
optimization problems [1]. Itp roduces solutionst o combinatorialo ptimization
problems usingas e t of agents, each representinga ni mprovementa lgorithm.
To avoidg e t tingt r a p p e dinto a localo ptimum ani n itial population ofs olu-
tionsc alled individuals isg enerated orc onstructed and nexts tored in common
memory. Individualsf orminga ni n itial population are, at the f ollowingc om-
putation stages,i mproved byi ndependently acting agents,w hich periodically

182 D. Barbucha
Fig. 1. UML communication diagram of solving process in JABAT
receiveas olution drawn fromt h ecommon memory by an agent,w ho manages
the population of individuals.A fter improvement, such solutionsa r es tored back
in the common memory usings ome predeﬁned population managements t r a t-
egy. The cycle oft h er e a ding-improving-replacing isc ontinued until as topping
criterion ism e t.
The main advantage of the proposed approach stems fromt h ef a c tt h a tsolu-
tions obtained byo ne agenta r es h a r e dwith other agents (through the central
memory mechanism), which can exploitt h e s esolutions in order to guide the
search through new promisingr e gion of the search space, thus increasingc h ances
forr e a c hingt h eglobalo ptimum.
The main functionalityo f the proposed environment which includes organizing
andc onducting the process ofs e a r c hingf ort h eb e s tsolution isr e alized mainly
by two classes of agents:
– SolutionManager (SMa) - an agent which manages the process ofﬁ ndingt h e
best solution and isr e s ponsiblef orm aintenance andu p d a ting of individuals
in the common memory,
– A set of optimization agents - OptiAgents (OA = OA1,OA2, ...,OA n), where
each oft h e misa ni mplementation oft h eimprovementa lgorithm (locali m-
provementh e u ristics, simulated annealing, tabu search, etc.) and its main
task ist oi mproveas olution periodically obtained from SolutionManager.
The agents ofb oth types act in parallel andc ommunicate with each other by
exchanging messages.F ig.1 presents anU M L communication diagram which
shows messages which are exchanged between agents in the process ofs olvinga
task.A fter the SolutionManager initializes the population ofs olution, it waits
fort h e information froma n OptiAgent announcing its readiness to act. Solu-
tionManager reads the required number ofs olutionsf romc ommon memory and
sends them to the OptiAgent,w hich improves it with its built-in improvement
algorithm.N ext, the improved solution iss entb a c kto SolutionManager and
added to the common memory. Then, again, the OptiAgent sends a message
informinga bout its readiness.T he wholep rocess continues until some stopping
criterion ism e t.

Cooperative Solution to the Vehicle Routing Problem 183
2.2 Implementation of the Learning Mechanism
In order toi mprove the process ofs e a r c hingf ort h eb e s tsolution ith a sb e en
decided to extend the proposed JABAT environmentb yi mplementingar e in-
forcement learningm e c h anism.T hish a sb e en carried out through:
1. Mo diﬁcation ofs ome agents already existed in system anda d ding newo nes,
2.M o diﬁcation oft h eorganization of the process ofs e a r c hing.
Among the agents already existinga nda vailable in the JABAT system there isa
SolutionMonitor.A lthough itd oes notp a r ticipate actively in process ofs olving
ani nstance of the problem,i tp lays importantr ole in itb y gatherings ome im-
portantd a t aa bout obtained results duringt h ewholep rocess ofs olving,w hich
are next written down to at extﬁ le.T he data gathered by SolutionMonitor are
periodically received from SolutionManager, and include:n ame oft h einstance
of the problem, the best solution obtained so far (that oft h em aximum orm in-
imum value ofﬁ tness), average value ofﬁ tness amongs olutionsf rom current
population, the actual time ofr unninga ndt h etime in which the best solution
was last reached.S uch report mayl ater be a nalyzed, fore xample itm ay be
read into a spreadsheet (i.e.M S Excel) andc onverted into a summary report
with the use ofap ivott a blet ool. The content ofa n examplet extﬁ le including
information written down toi tb y SolutionMonitor isp r e s ented below.
Name Time Best Avg
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 0.0
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 0.65 910.65 938.93
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 0.90 905.32 938.82
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 1.51 904.75 938.64
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 1.90 898.02 938.33
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 7.21 878.05 937.47
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 15.65 872.56 919.10
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 16.01 870.97 916.58
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 21.78 863.90 909.38
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 32.14 863.38 896.23
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 40.29 863.36 891.20
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 52.31 858.81 888.54
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt 60.32
Although SolutionMonitor collects importantd a t aa bout historyo fs e a r c hing
fort h eb e s tsolution recordingh ow many times the best s olution is improved,
how fast the s ystem converges to the optimal solution, etc,i td oes notc on-
centrate on behavior of the particular optimization agent.W Ith this in mind,
the new agentc alled AgentStatistics has been specially designed forc ollecting
information about behavior ofe a c hoptimization agent duringt h e wholep ro-
cess ofs olvingap r oblem.F ore a c hOptiAgent such information includes:n ame
oft h eoptimization agents,n umber ofs olution obtained byi tt oi mprovef rom

184 D. Barbucha
SolutionManager,n umber ofs olution sentb a c kbyi tt o SolutionManager after
improvementp rocess,n umber ofr uns in which the solution received by Opti-
Agents were improved byi t, and number ofr uns which the g lobalo ptimum
founds o far has beeni mproved.T he content ofa n examplet extﬁ le including
information written down toi tb y AgentStatistics isp r e s ented below.
jabat-SMa__t-SMo_vrpnc02_00_1__vrpnc2.txt
OptiAgent Sent Received Improved BestImproved
VRP.Opti3Opt 44 39 27 1
VRP.Opti2Lambda 42 36 32 1
VRP.OptiLSA 164 66 61 8
As it was mentioned,i n the current organization ofp rocess ofs e a r c hingf ort h e
best solution, SolutionManager sends the solution taken fromt h ecommon mem-
ory to the OptiAgent,i mmediately after receiving a message about readiness from
it.T here are few advantages oft his approach.F ore xample, OptiAgents don ot
havet ow aste theirt ime for waitingf ora new request.B ut on the other hand,
taking into accountt h a tOptiAgents representt h eimprovementa lgorithms of
various complexity( simple local search heuristic vs. tabu search, fore xample),
it isp ossiblet h a tOptiAgents representingr a t h e rsimple, fast and less eﬀec-
tiveh e u ristics will be much ofteni n v oked by SolutionManager than OptiAgents
representingm u c hcomplex algorithms,w hich require much time toi mprovea
solution. The consequence ofs u c hoften calls of less eﬀective optimization agents
ist h e increase ofc onsumption oft h ec omputational resources by the system
without the raise oft h eeﬀectiveness ofp roposed approach.
Additional hypothesis ist h a ta tt h eb e ginning oft h es e a r c h, all optimization
agents mayi mprovet h esolution, but as the searchingp rocess will progress,i n
particular state ofs e a r c hing,i tc ouldb ep ossiblet h a tonly particular optimiza-
tion agent will haves ome positive impact on the solution quality.
Taking into consideration the above,i th a sb e en decided toi mprovet h eor-
ganization of the process ofs e a r c hingb yi mplementingar e inforcement learning
mechanism.T he main goalo f the proposed changes ist o promote optimization
agents which do havet h ep ositive impact on solution improvementa nd often
improvet h eb e s tknown solution obtained so far in process ofs e a r c hing.
To perform the reinforcement learning,i t is necessary toi dentify the beneﬁ-
cial calls of optimization agents by SolutionManager through observation oft h e
action sequence performed byo ptimization agents anda s sign them a reward.I n
proposed approach a reinforcement learning isp e r formed only when the agent
ﬁnds a solution better thani ts previous best founds olution and only such call
of OptiAgent by SolutionManager will be reinforced.
Now, SolutionManager does nots endag iven solution to everyo ptimization
agent which announces its readiness but waits fort h einformation about readi-
ness froma ll OptiAgents.N ext, SolutionManager chooses one OptiAgent, ac-
cordingt o ap r e d e ﬁned choice function, ands ends toi tt h er e q uired number of

Cooperative Solution to the Vehicle Routing Problem 185
solutionsr e a df romt h ecommon memory. The rest oft h eoptimization agents
remains waitingf ort h enextc hoice.
Decision, which optimization agent isc hosen for improvingd e p ends on weight
assigned to each optimization agent.
Let wOAi be the weight of i− th OptiAgent which reﬂects its ability toi m-
provet h eb e s tknown solution obtained so far in process ofs e a r c hing, taking
into accountt h eh istoryo f its behavior.D uring the pr ocess ofs e a r c hingt h e
values oft h eweights assigned to given OptiAgents may change (increase ord e-
crease) depending on eﬀectiveness oft his agent duringt h es e a r c hing.A positive
reinforcement learning isp e r formed when the agentﬁ nds a solution better than
previous best known solution, otherwise, calling of agent is negatively reinforced.
The choice function - f isaf u nction which isr e s ponsiblef ors electinga n
optimization agent, taking into account weights ofa ll optimization agents.I ts
construction shouldg u a r antee that agents which ofteni mprovet h eb e s tknown
solution obtained so far in process ofs e a r c hing will be promoted in nextc ycle
ofs e a r c hing.
3 c-JABAT Implementation for Solving Vehicle Routing
Problem
The presented modiﬁed cooperativem ulti-agents ystem has beenv alidated on
probably one oft h eb e s tknown optimization problem fromt r ansportation area
-VehicleR outing Problem in which a setofg iven customers ist o be served by the
ﬂeet of vehicles in order to minimize the service cost ands a tisfyings everal cus-
tomer’sa nd vehicle’sc onstraints: each route starts ande nds at the depot, each
customer iss e rviced exactly once by as ingle vehiclea ndt h etotall oad on any ve-
hiclea s sociated with a given route does note xceed vehicle capacity [5], [10].
3.1 Agents
One SolutionManager andf our types of OptiAgents haveb e eni mplemented
usingt h efollowingh e u ristics and local search procedures:
– OA1(3Opt) an agent which isa ni mplementation oft h e3-opt local search
algorithm operating on as ingler oute.F irst, forag iven feasibles olution
(tour) three edges are rem oved and nextr e m aining edges are rec onnected
in all possible waysu ntil a new feasibles olution (tour)i s obtained.T his
operation is repeated fora ll solutions.
– OA2(2Lambda) ani mplementation oft h e local search algorithm based on
λ-interchange localo ptimization method.I t operates on two selected routes
and isb a s e don the interchange/move ofc u s tomers between routes.F ore a c h
pair ofr outes froma ni ndividual ap a r t sofr outes of length less thano re q u al
tol are chosen and next these parts are shifted ore xchanged, accordingt o
the selected operator.P ossible operators are deﬁned as pairs:( v,u ), where
u, v =1 , ... ,λ denote the lengths of the part ofr outes which are m oved

186 D. Barbucha
ore xchanged.F ore xample,o perator (2, 0) indicates a shift a two customers
from the ﬁrst route to the secondr oute,o perator (2, 2)i ndicates an exchange
oft wo customers between routes.T ypically, λ = 2a nds u c hvalue was used
in the proposed implementation.
– OA3(LSA) ani mplementation oft h elocal search algorithm which operates
on two selected routes.F irst, a node (customer) situated relatively far from
the centroid of the ﬁrst route isr e moved from ita nd next it is inserted to
the secondr oute fore a c ht h edistance between the vertices andt h ec entroid
oft h eother route iss m aller.T he position of insertion is determined by the
cheapest insertion method [3].
It ise a sy too bserve that agent 3Opt has rather simple structure in contrast to
the 2Lambda or LSA optimization agents in which the process ofs e a r c hingf or
the best solution ism u c hcomplex andt ime consuming.
3.2 Choice Function and Weight Modiﬁcation
Considering various forms ofc hoice function as well as methods of agents’w eights
changes during the process ofs e a r c hing ith a sb e en decided to adopt ones from
Nareyek’s approach to constraints a tisfaction problem [6]. Inthis work, he consid-
ered the problem ofc hoosing search heuristics by reinforcement learning during
the process ofs e a r c hingf ort h esolution but not in the multi-agentc ontext.
As it was mentioned selection betweeno ptimization agents available in the
system isd oneb a s e don the weight value assigned to each agent.I nthe presented
approach such selection isb a s e don the proportional selectionprinciple,i nw hich
ag iveno ptimization agent OAi isc hosen by the SolutionManager with a choice
probability pOAi in proportion to the agent’s weight wOAi :
pOAi = wOAi
∑
j=1...n wOAj
Initially all optimization agents havea weight set too ne, but during the pro-
cess ofs e a r c hingf ort h eb e s tsolution, the values oft h e weights assigned to
optimization agents may change. Generally, the degree ofc h ange depends on
the eﬀectiveness of the agent during the process ofs e a r c hinga nd isc onsidered
after SolutionManager receives ani mproved solution froms ome OptiAgent.I f
the currentc ost function value is better than the best cost function value before
callingg iven OptiAgent, the weight of respective OptiAgent is increased (positive
reinforcement), otherwise it is decreased orr e m ainsa tt h es a m elevel( negative
reinforcement).
Three possibilities fort h epositivec h ange of the agent’s weight are allowed [6]:
– P1: wOAi ← wOAi +1
– P2: wOAi ← 2∗ wOAi
– P3: wOAi ←
{wOAi ∗ wOAi : wOAi > 1
2 : wOAi =1
Also, four p ossibilities fort h e negativec h ange of the age nt’s weight are a l-
lowed [6]:

Cooperative Solution to the Vehicle Routing Problem 187
– N0: wOAi ← wOAi (no change)
– N1: wOAi ← wOAi − 1
– N2: wOAi ←
wOAi
2
– N3: wOAi ←√
wOAi
Ifa ta ny moment ofs e a r c hinga n agent’s weight fallsb elow 1, it is reset to1 .
Also, ifa n agent’s weight exceeds a predeﬁned constant value wmax,i t is reset
to wmax.
4 Computational Experiment
Computational experimenta imed at validatinge ﬀectiveness of the proposed ap-
proach ande valuatingh ow the implemented reinforcement learningm e c h anism
inﬂuences computation results, measured as mean relativee r ror (MRE). Results
obtained fora ll possiblec ombinations oft h epositivea nd negativec h anges are
compared with the results obtained without any reinforcement,w here all opti-
mization agents have the same probabilityo fb eingc hosen duringt h esystem is
running.
c-JABAT implementation for VRPw as tested on 5 test problems fromO RLi-
brary benchmark set [11]. The selected problems contain 50-199 customers and
have only capacity restriction.
Each oft h e5i nstances of the problem was run fore a c hpossiblec ombination
ofr einforcement learnings t r a t e gies (includingt h ec a s ewithout any learning), in
total giving 65 (5x13) test problems.M oreover, each test problem was repeatedly
executed 10 times andm e an results fromt h e s er uns were recorded.
All computationsh aveb e en carried out on the cluster Holk oft h e Tricity
AcademicC omputer Network built of2 56 IntelI tanium 2 Dual Core with 12
MB L3 cache processors with Mellanox InﬁniBand interconnections with 10Gb/s
bandwidth.
The experimentr e s ults are shown in tables 1 and2 .T ab.1 showsm e an rela-
tivee r rors fromt h eb e s tknown solution obtained by c-JABAT implementation
for VRP fore a c hs elected reinforcements t r a t e gy andf ors elected instances from
ORLibrary. In turn, Tab. 2s howsm e an relativee r rors fromt h eb e s tknown
solution obtained by proposed approach fort h es a m einstances grouped by pos-
siblep ositivea nd negativec h anges of agents’w eight. Results in thist a blea r e
averaged over all tested instances.
Analysis oft h er e s ults presented in both tables allows onet o conclude that
presented multi-agent approach fors olving VRP produces relatively goods olu-
tionst oi nstances oft h eVRP. The value ofm e an relativee r rors t rongly depends
on the instance of the pr oblem and on the kind ofc h anges of agent’s weight
during the process ofs e a r c hingf ort h eb e s tsolution.
By observingr e s ults obtained by the system without any learninga ndc om-
paringt h e mwith results obtained by the system with implemented the above
mechanism, the inﬂuence ofr einforcement learning on qualityo fs olution iss e en
form ost combinations ofp ositivea nd negativec h anges.

188 D. Barbucha
Table 1. The performance of the proposed agent-based approach (MRE) calculated
for each reinforcement strategy and for selected instances from ORLibrary
INSTANCE
STRATEGY vrpnc1 vrpnc2 vrpnc3 vrpnc4 vrpnc5 AVG
(50) (75) (100) (150) (199)
P1-N0 0.00% 0.72% 1.13% 3.41% 4.22% 1.89%
P1-N1 0.00% 1.47% 0.48% 1.79% 4.21% 1.59%
P1-N2 0.00% 1.43% 0.84% 2.52% 4.18% 1.79%
P1-N3 0.00% 0.33% 0.67% 2.53% 3.45% 1.40%
P2-N0 0.00% 1.19% 0.70% 2.93% 4.81% 1.93%
P2-N1 0.00% 1.60% 0.96% 2.29% 4.30% 1.83%
P2-N2 0.00% 1.70% 1.02% 1.92% 4.36% 1.80%
P2-N3 0.00% 0.72% 1.44% 2.65% 4.42% 1.85%
P3-N0 0.00% 2.24% 1.23% 2.27% 4.11% 1.97%
P3-N1 0.00% 1.28% 1.10% 2.35% 3.98% 1.74%
P3-N2 0.00% 0.82% 1.26% 3.14% 4.07% 1.86%
P3-N3 0.00% 1.88% 0.94% 2.97% 4.26% 2.01%
without reinforcement 0.00% 1.28% 1.26% 3.38% 3.98% 1.98%
Table 2. The performance of the proposed agent-based approach (MRE) calculated
for each kind of possible agents’ weight change (positive and negative) averaged over
all tested instances from ORLibrary
N0 N1 N2 N3 AVG
P1 1.89% 1.59% 1.79% 1.40% 1.67%
P2 1.93% 1.83% 1.80% 1.85% 1.85%
P3 1.97% 1.74% 1.86% 2.01% 1.89%
AVG 1.93% 1.72% 1.82% 1.75% 1.80%
Amongt h evarious cases ofc ombinations ofp ositivea nd negativer einforce-
ment the best resu lts are observed fora ll combinations in which slow positive
increase of agent’s weight byo ne (P1) is included.I tc an be concluded that such
gradually raise of weight during the process ofs olving the problem allowst h e
SolutionManager to choose all optimization agents with almost the same prob-
ability at early stages ofc omputation, simultaneously promotingt h eb e s tones
in following stages.
On the other hand,i n all cases in which no negativec h anges are considered
(N0), the results are worse thani n those with any negativec h anges.D eeper
analysis of the behavior of agents running in the system brings the observation
that in case in which only positivec h anges of agents’w eights are considered,
only one optimization agentp roducingr elatively goods olutionsa te a rly stages
ofp rocess ofs e a r c hing isp romoted andc alled in next stages.A sc onsequence,
the localo ptimum is reached very fast andt h e r eis no chance ford iversiﬁcation
ofs e a r c hing.

Cooperative Solution to the Vehicle Routing Problem 189
5 Conclusions
The main contribution of the paperisp roposingac ooperativem ulti-agents ystem
fors olving vehicler outingp roblem as an extension of JADE-Based A-Team with
reinforcement learningm e c h anism implemented in it.T he validatinge xperiment
conﬁrmed that the approach basedon multiple agents may be useful fors olving in-
stances oft h evehicler outingp roblem.I ta lso has been shown that combination of
cooperatives e a r c hingf ort h eb e s tsolution with learningm e c h anism,w here agents
adapt theirb e h aviort o the new conditions ofe nvironment during the process of
solving the problem may bringp otential beneﬁts andr e s ults in producings olu-
tions of a better quality. As it was observed, the positive impact ofs u c hlearning in
multi-agents ystem on the qualityo fs olution depends on form ofr eward assigned
to software agents during the process ofs olving the problem.
Acknowledgments. Calculationsh aveb e en performed in the AcademicC om-
puter Centre TASK in Gdansk.
References
1. Barbucha, D., Czarnowski, I., J¸edrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak-Ropel, E., Wierzbowska,
I.: An Implementation of the JADE-based A-Team Environment. International
Transactions on System Science and Applications 3(4), 319–328 (2008)
2. Le Bouthillier, A., Crainic, T.G., Kropf, P.: A Guided Cooperative Search for the
Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows. IEEE Intelligent Systems 20(4),
36–42 (2005)
3. Golden, B., Stewart, W.: Empirical Analysis of Heuristics. In: Lawler, E., Lenstra,
J., Rinnoy, A., Shmoys, D. (eds.) Travelling Salesman Problem, pp. 207–250. Wiley-
Interscience, New York (1985)
4. Jennings, N.R., Sycara, K., Wooldridge, M.: A Roadmap of Agent Research and
Development. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 1, 7–38 (1998)
5. Laporte, G., Gendreau, M., Potvin, J., Semet, F.: Classical and modern heuris-
tics for the vehicle routing problem. International Transactions in Operational Re-
search 7, 285–300 (2000)
6. Nareyek, A.: Choosing Search Heuristics by Non-Stationary Reinforcement Learn-
ing. In: Resende, M.G.C., de Sousa, J.P. (eds.) Metaheuristics: Computer Decision-
Making, pp. 523–544. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (2003)
7. Panait, L., Luke, S.: Cooperative Multi-Agent Learning: The State of the Art.
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 11(3), 387–434 (2005)
8. Rochat, Y., Taillard, E.D.: Probabilistic Diversiﬁcation and Intensiﬁcation in Local
Search for Vehicle Routing. Journal of Heuristics 1(1), 147–167 (1995)
9. Talukdar, S., Baeretzen, L., Gove, A., de Souza, P.: Asynchronous teams: Cooper-
ation schemes for autonomous agents. Journal of Heuristics 4, 295–321 (1998)
10. Toth, P., Vigo, D. (eds.): The Vehicle Routing Problem. SIAM Monographs Dis-
crete Mathematics and Applications. SIAM, Philadelphia (2002)
11. OR-Library, http://people.brunel.ac.uk/~mastjjb/jeb/orlib/vrpinfo.html

AdQL – Anomaly Detection Q-Learning in
Control Multi-queue Systems with QoS
Constraints⋆
MichalS tanek and Halina Kwasnicka
Wroclaw University of Technology, Instytut of Informatics
{michal.stanek, halina.kwasnicka}@pwr.wroc.pl
Abstract. Reinforcement Learning is an optimal adaptive optimiza-
tion method for stationary environments. For non-stationary environ-
ments where the transition function and reward structure change over
time, the traditional algorithms seems to be ineﬀective in order to fol-
low the environmental changes. In this paper we propose the Anomaly
Detection Q-learning algorithm which increase learning abilities of stan-
dard Q-learning algorithm by applying Chauvenet’s criterion to detects
anomalies.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is veryi mportant paradigm within ArtiﬁcialI n -
telligence (AI) ﬁelda ndc orresponds to the wayi nw hich human anda nimals
learn[ 1 ,2,3]. RL emphasizes learningb y the individual from its interaction with
its environmentb y answeringt o the question which action wes houldc hoose in
some states to maximize a numerical reward signal. RLi sa lso proved to be a
good adaptive optimization method [4].
Doya [5] showed the connection ofR Lw ith the wayw hich humanl earn be-
haviour through relationship of parameters used in the reinforcement learning
process ton eurotransmitters in the human brain. The discountf a c tor γ,w hich
determines how far the agents hould look into the future, corresponds to the sero-
tonin (5-HT). The levelo ft hisc ompound isr e s ponsiblef or impulsiveb e h aviour,
like aggression. The temporal diﬀerence error δ which is essential for learning
process isr elated to dopamine (DA). Learningr a t eα, related to acetylcholine
(ACh), isr e s ponsiblef orf orgetting oldf a c t sin favour oft h enewi nformation.
The actionss election randomness parameter β (in soft-max technique called
temperature)i sr elated ton oradrenaline (NA).
Classical reinforcement learninga lgorithms haveb e en developed tow ork in
stationary environments.I ndynamical environmentt h ef a s t e rconvergence too p-
timal strategy couldb ea c hieved by dynamically changing parametersof learning
process.T hisc orresponds to situations where the levelo fs e rotonin is increased
when the person iss ituated in unknown environment.M urakoshi and Mizuno[6]
⋆ This work is co-ﬁnanced by European Union within European Social Fund.
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 190–199, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

AdQL – Anomaly Detection Q-Learning in Control Multi-queue Systems 191
proposed method ofc ontrol the parameters ofr einforcement learningp rocess
based on the distance of currentr einforcements ignal to the meanv alue.I ft h e
distance ish igh the learningr a t eis increased andd iscountf a c tor is decrement.
Such strategyi s notg ood in case where variation in reinforcements ignali sh igh.
Algorithm proposed byM urakoshi and Mizuno don otg u a r antees ﬁndingt h e
optimal strategy.
Denise de Oliveira et al. propose Reinforcement Learningm e t hod with Con-
text Detection [7]. Theyi n vestigate non-stationary environments in the area of
traﬃc lights optimization, andt h ey assumed that the e nvironmentc an be di-
vided into aﬁ nite number ofe nvironments from which each oneh a sdiﬀerent
dynamics orr eward structure.B efore each decision, the algorithm try to ﬁndt h e
environmentm odelw hich best suits for observed reinforcement value and state
transition. The resulted action ist h en calculated within the selected model. The
authors did nots how ift h emodels oft h eenvironment during operation oft h e
system are suﬃciently diﬀerent that they provide eﬀectivec riterion ofc ontext
selection. An additional drawback of the proposed approach is very bigm e mory
requirements.
Findinge ﬀectivem e c h anisms for reactingt o changes in the environment is
veryi mportant in the context oft h em ulti-agents ystems.I n multi-agents ys-
tems, environmentd ynamically depends on many actionsp e r formed byi ndivid-
ual agents. Each agents hould be capab lee ﬀectively adopt to changes in the
dynamice nvironment.
In thisp a p e rwep ropose the RL algorithm which detects the anomalies in the
dynamice nvironmentt h rough the Chauvenet’sc riterion[8]. Thisc riterion check
the possibilityo f observation in context ofm e anv alue and variation ofp r evious
observations,w hich control the learning parameters values.
In the next section web rieﬂy describe the Re inforcement Learninga ndQ -
Learninga lgorithm, thenw e describe pr oposed improvement in standard Q-
Learninga lgorithm by addinga nomaly detection mechanism.I n third section
we describe evaluation of the pr oposed method on multi-queue control prob-
lem.A tt h ee nd wem a k econclusionsa nd indicate further improvements and
research challenges.
2P r o p o s e d M e t h o d
In this section we introduce Markov Decision Process (MPD) as a modelo fR L
problems.T henw eb rieﬂy describe standard Q-learninga lgorithm as a solution
toM D Pi n case ofu nknown parameters.A tt h eend of the section wep r e s ent
extension ofs t andard Q-learninga lgorithm fora nomaly detection usingC h a u-
venet’sc riterion.
2.1 Reinforcement Learning
Markov decision process (MDP)[9,1], characterized by the 4–tuple⟨ΩS,Ω A,p ,r⟩,
ist h em a t h e m a tical modelo fr einforcement learningp roblem. ΩS ist h eﬁnite

192 M. Stanek and H. Kwasnicka
set of states, ΩA ist h eﬁnite set ofa c tions, p ist h es t a t e-transition function, and
r ist h er einforcement/reward function. Fore a c hp air⟨s, a⟩∈ΩS× ΩA,v alues
of p(s, a) and r(s, a) are random variables where p : ΩS × ΩA → ΩS speciﬁes
the nexts ystem state and r : ΩS × ΩA →ℜspeciﬁes the reinforcementa f t e r
selectinga c tion a in state s.I nM D P problems the value of p and r depends
only on the currents ystem state andas e lected action. We assume that b oth,
the reinforcementf unction and state transition function are constantt h roughout
the wholed e cision process.
The strategy π : ΩS → ΩA ist h em e t hod ofs electinga n action forag iven
state.T he expected discounted sumofr einforcements [r(st+1,at+1),r (st+2,at+2),
r(st+3,a t+3), ...]i n successivet ime unitd e p ends on the chosen strategy. Wec an
write ita sa value function:
V π(s)= E
[∞∑
k=0
γkr(st+k,π (st+k))|st = s
]
, (1)
where γ isd iscountf a c tor.W ec oulda lsow rite the value function in a recursive
form:
V π(s)= E [r (s, π(s))] +γ
∑
y∈ΩS
P(p(s, π(s)) = y)· V π(y), (2)
where E[r(s, a)] ise xpected value ofr einforcementa f t e rc hoosinga c tion a in
state s. P(p(s, a)= y)i s the probability that after choosinga c tion a in state s,
the next state wouldb e y.
Whenw ek now both, transition function p andr einforcementf unction r, to
ﬁndt h eoptimal control strategyw ec an use value iteration ors t r a t e gyi teration
algorithms.I ft h e s ef unctionsa r eunknown, as in majorityo fr e al-life problems,
they must be estimated during interaction with the environment.
Reinforcement learningc an be treat as a wayo fﬁ ndingt h eoptimal strategy
in ac a s ewhere both transition andr eward function are unknown[2,1]. Rein-
forcement learningc onsists ofﬁ veb a sics t e p s:
1. o bservea c t u al state xt
2. select an action at to perform in the state xt based on currents t r a t e gy πt
3. perform action at
4.o bserver einforcement rt and next state xt+1
5. learn and improve currents t r a t e gy πt based on experience
⟨
xt,a t,r t,xt+1⟩
Q-learning is one oft h em ost widely used RL algorithms.I n Q-Learning, the
value function isr e placed byv alue-action function Qπ : ΩS × ΩA →ℜ.T he
optimal policy π∗ = argmaxa∈A Q∗(x, a) can be obtain by solvingf ollowing
equation:
Q∗(x, a)= g(x, a)+ γ
∑
yi n Ω
P(y|x, π(x))· max
a′∈A
Q∗(y,a ′)( 3 )
The learnings t e pin Q-learninga lgorithm consist oft wo actions:

AdQL – Anomaly Detection Q-Learning in Control Multi-queue Systems 193
1. calculate the temporal diﬀerence: Δ = rt +γ maxa′∈ΩA Q(st+1,a ′)−Q(st,a t)
2. update Q–function: Q(xt,a t)← Q(xt,a t)+ αΔ,
where γ isd iscountf a c tor, and α is learningr a t e.
It isp r oved that Q –learning improves strategy π in successivet ime steps
toward optimal strategy π∗ under assumption that when t→∞ all states will
be visited∞ number oft imes.
2.2 AdQ–Learning
Q-learninga lgorithm ensures convergence to the optimal strategyw hen the dy-
namica ndr eward structure oft h ee nvironmenta r ec onstant during learning
process.I n dynamice nvironment, the Q-learninga lgorithm can be ablet o de-
tect the changes and adapt to changingc onditionsb y use ofs tochastics t r a t e gies.
The speed of adaptation depends on such parameters as learningr a t eα andt h e
discountf a c tor γ.W henw e work with a stab lee nvironment, the value of α
shouldb ea ss m all as possible (wes houldh ave veryl o ngm e moryo f our expe-
riences), anda tt h es a m etime γ shouldb ec lose to1( choosinga n action we
should lookf a rinto the future consequences).
The adaptation ofQ -learninga lgorithm could be betterif we detect anomalies
in the environment.A n omaly shouldb eu nderstooda sas igniﬁcantd iﬀerence in
the reward structure and states transitionsc ompared with the observed previ-
ously. Many methods can be used fora nomalies detection [10]. However, taking
into accountt h es t a tisticaln ature oft h elearningp rocess, statistical methods
seem to be interesting.
Supposingt h a tweh aves u ﬃ ciently large number of observationsa ndb oth,
reward structure andt r ansition function, depend on many random variables,w e
couldu s et h ec entrall imitt h eorem and suppose that b oth oft h e mcouldb e
described byn ormal distribution. In normal distribution 99% of observations lie
in ad istance less than3 σ.I n distance less then3 σ –9 9, 73% observations, 4· σ
–9 9.993%, 5· σ –9 9.99994%, and 6· σ –9 9.9999998%o bservations.
The idea of detectingt h eanomalies in dynamice nvironment isb a s e don de-
tection ofs u c hobservations, for which a distance to the meanv alue,i n ac ontext
ofh istorical data variation, iss ol arge that it is very unlikely that they are gen-
erated by t h es a m emodel. To detect such observations weu s e dC h a uvenet’s [8]
criterion.
To calculate Chauvenet criterion weh avet o know the meanv alue ands t an-
dard deviation in historical data, andt h enw ec alculate the distance factor:
w =|¯x− x|
σ . (4)
Based on distance factor w,w eh avet o calculate the probability that−w≤ x≤ w.
p = P(x≤ w)− P(x≤− w)= F(w)− F(−w)( 5 )
where F isc u m ulatived istribution function for N(0, 1) at the end if p· N≤ 1
2we detect anomaly.

194 M. Stanek and H. Kwasnicka
Toadopt Chauvenet criterion inQ-learninga lgorithm fora ll state-action pairs
weh avet o be ablet o calculate the meanv alue andt h es t andard deviation of
historical reinforcements.F ortunately wed on oth avet o store all historical data
to do that, and wea r ea blet o calculate those values in iterativem anner.T he de-
tailed description of Anomaly Detection Q-learning (AdQ-learning)i sp r e s ented
in Algorithm 1. The main diﬀerence betweenA dQ-learninga nds t andard Q-
learninga lgorithms ist h a twhen anomaly occurs the AdQ-learningt e m porarily
changes the values of parameters α, γ and τ.A fter that these parameters are
changed by as m all value till they reach the originalv alues.
3 Evaluation
In order to examine the proposed AdQL method weh aveu s e dita sac ontrol
strategyo n as e rver in pollings ystem[10,11]. The next section presents a model
ofu s e ds e rver, thenw e describe the reinforcementf unction and state represen-
tation. After this,w e describe the results ofe xperiments.
3.1 Multi-queue System Model
A pollings ystem consists ofs ingles e rver that pollsa number of queues.I no ur
example wet r e a tapollings ystem as a modelo f Internet router.We assume that
all packets haveﬁ xed constant length which ist ypical fort h einternal queues in
routers that use a cell switchingf a b rics[12]. This assumption allowsu st o model
traﬃc usingd iscrete-time arrival process,w here onet ime slot ofﬁ xed length is
required to transmit onep a c k e t.T he system modeli ss ho w ni nF ig.1 ,w here
input ﬂow– represents all traﬃc packets sendt o the router, classiﬁer – assigns
packets to the appr opriate queues, priority queues - contain packets from
diﬀerentt r a ﬃ cclasses (each traﬃc class has its own queue) andt h escheduler
- choose service order of the queues.
Each traﬃc class i isr e p r e s ented by a separate priority queue qi,w here i =
1, ..,N .A l lqueues haveﬁ nite capacity, andc an holdm aximum Ni packets.I f
qi holds exactly Ni packets, andc lassiﬁer ﬁnds in the input ﬂow nextp a c k e t
fromt hist r a ﬃ cclass, thisp a c k e twill be rejected.A l ltraﬃc classes havet h e
same Bernoulli arrival process,w ith the meanv alue λi for i− th traﬃc class.
Thism e anst h a tin each time slot wec ano bserve new packet in queue qi with
probability λi.
Fig. 1. Model of the multi-queue system

AdQL – Anomaly Detection Q-Learning in Control Multi-queue Systems 195
Algorithm 1. AdQLA lgorithm with Soft-Max action selection strategy
Require: T - minimal number of observation
αnormal -l e a r n i n gr a t e0<α start < 1
αstep - amount of change in learning rate 0 <α step < 1
αshake - learning rate level after anomaly detection 0 <α shake < 1
γnormal -d i s c o u n tf a c t o r0≤ γstart < 1
γetep - amount of change in discount factor 0 ≤ γstep < 1
γshake - discount factor level after anomaly detection 0 ≤ γshake < 1
τstart - starting level of temperature for soft max strategyτstart > 0
τend - ﬁnal level of temperature for soft max strategy τend > 0
τetep - amount of temperature change for soft max strategy τstep > 0
τshake - temperature level after anomaly detection τshake > 0
1: Q[s,a] ⇐ initialized arbitrary for all s ∈ ΩS and a ∈ ΩA
2: S[s,a] ⇐ 0, for all s ∈ ΩS and a ∈ ΩA
3: K[s,a] ⇐ 0, for all s ∈ ΩS and a ∈ ΩA
4: I[s,a] ⇐ 0, for all s ∈ ΩS and a ∈ ΩA
5: t ⇐ 0,
6: γt ⇐ γnormal,
7: αt ⇐ αnormal
8: τt ⇐ τstart
9: repeat
10: st ⇐ Observe current state
11: Choose action with probability π(s,a)=
exp(Q∗ [st,at ]/τt)
∑
b∈A exp(Q[st,b]/τt)
12: Perform action a0.8t and Observe next state st+1 and reinforcement rt
13: σ =
√
I[st,at](K[st,at]−S[st,at])
I[st,at]−1
14: w = |S[st,a t] − r|
σ
15: anomaly =
(
I[st,a t] · (FN(0,1)(w) − FN(0,1)(−w)) < 0.5
)
16: if anomaly and I[st,a t] >T then
17: S[s,a] ⇐ 0, for all s ∈ ΩS and a ∈ ΩA
18: K[s,a] ⇐ 0, for all s ∈ ΩS and a ∈ ΩA
19: I[s,a] ⇐ 0, for all s ∈ ΩS and a ∈ ΩA
20: αt+1 = αshake
21: γt+1 = γshake
22: τt+1 = τshake
23: else
24: K[st,a t] ⇐ K[st,a t]+( rt)2
25: S[st,a t] ⇐ S[st,a t]+ 1
I[st,at]+1
(
rt − S[st,a t]
)
26: I[st,a t] ⇐ I[st,a t]+1
27: αt+1 = max(αt − αstep,α normal)
28: γt+1 = max(γt − γstep,γ normal)
29: τt+1 = max(τt − τstep,τ end)
30: end if
31: Δ = αt(rt + γt maxa′∈A Q[st+1,a ′] − Q[st,a t])
32: Q[st,a t] ⇐ Q[st,a t]+ Δ
33: t ⇐ t +1
34: until forever

196 M. Stanek and H. Kwasnicka
The QoS limitationsa r ee xpressed by maximum allowable waitingt ime Ri
forp a c k e t sin queue q1, ...,q N −1.T he last queue qN does noth avea ny delay
requirement, ands houldb es e rved as quickly as possible,w ed enote this queue
as the best-eﬀort queue . Queue qN has no limitation ofs e rvice time, but
packets in this queue shouldb es e rviced as soon as possible.
Scheduler must ch oose onea c tion ai froma c tion set A = {a1,a2, ..,a N}.
Action ai meanst h a ts e rver will get onep a c k e tf rom queue qi.I no net ime-unit,
no more thano ne package can be served.A l lqueues are served in FCFS (First
Came First Served)o rder.
3.2 State Representation an d Reinforcement Function
In order to reduce the state space we assumed that each queue has two states.
Queue status depends on whether the time restriction iss a tisﬁed (eg.6 ) :
s(qi)=
{
0, if w(qi)≤ Ri
1, if w(qi) >R i, (6)
where w(qi)i s waitingt ime of the ﬁrst package in queue qi.T he system state
S ={s1,s2, ...,s N −1} isc omposition of states of queues q1 to qN −1 (the state of
best-eﬀort qN queue is nott a k eni nto consideration).
The reinforcementf unction is importantf ort h econvergence oft h elearning
process.I n the experiments weu s efollowingf unction:
rt =
N −1∑
i=1
ζ(qt
i)+ ς(qt
N ), (7)
where rt isr einforcements ignali n time t, qt
i is i–th queue in time t.T he ζ(qi)
function isr e s ponsiblef orh oldingt h etime constraints in queue qi.T he function
isg iven by equation (8):
ζ(qt
i)=
{
C1·w(qt
i)2 ·
Ri
, if w(qt
i )≤ Ri
−C2, if w(qt
i ) >R i,
(8)
The ς(qi)( eq.9 ) function promotes situations with little waitingt ime in best-
eﬀort qN queue:
ς(qt
i)= −C3· w(qt
i), (9)
where C3 isa n constant value.
3.3 Experiments
To evaluate the proposed method weh aveu s e dt h epollings ystem with three
traﬃc classes,w here two oft h e mh aveQ oS requirementd e ﬁned as the maximum
waitingt ime.T he arrival time between packages hasPoisson distribution. During
the workingt ime weh avec h anged the parameters oft h ea r rival process andt h e

AdQL – Anomaly Detection Q-Learning in Control Multi-queue Systems 197
QoS requirements.I n each experimentc h anges tookp lace after 2000 cycles of
simulation. Att h eb e ginning ofe a c hsimulation the arrival process parameters
was deﬁned as Λ1 =0 .10, Λ2 =0 .25 and Λ3 =0 .55, andt h eQoS requirements
Q1 =5 , Q2 = 30, and Q3 has no time constraints;i t is treated as Best-Eﬀort.
After 2000 simulation cycles wes witched the parameters values to Λ1 =0 .30,
Λ2 =0 .15 and Λ3 =0 .10, andt h eQoS requirements Q1 = 8, Q2 =1 0 and Q3
stay as Best-Eﬀort queue.A fter each 2000 wes witch between those values.
Wer un two scenarios in which wec h anged the service method.I n the ﬁrst
scenario, all packets are handled with the constantt ime equalo nec ycle.I n the
seconds c enario the packages service time was variablea nd was drawn fromc on-
tinuous exponential distribution. In each scenario, wep e r formed 50 experiments
to examinees standard Q-learninga ndp roposed AdQ-learninga lgorithms.I n
all runs weh aveu s e dfollowing parameters values: τstart =5 0.0, τend =1 0.0,
τlen = 10, α =0 .01, γ =0 .85, C1 = 60,C2 = 20, C3 =1 .I nA dQ-Learning
algorithm wes e t: αshake =0 .1, γshake =0 .8, ands t e psize γstep = αstep =0 .001.
Results from the ﬁrst scenario are presented in Fig. 2.T he ﬁgure presents an
averaged value of waitingt ime in each of the queues, fors t andard Q-learning
2(a) andp roposed AdQ-learning2 (b), in case when package service time are
constant.T he average value ofr einforcement obtained by standard Q-learning
is4 5.457 with the u ncertainty equal0 .029 ands t d. deviation 36 .496917f or
1481959 measured values.T he hypothesist h a tobtained reinforcement values
was drawn from normal distribution, was checked using Shapiro-Wilk normality
test.T hist e s tp a s swith p -value equa l0 .981879. U singp r oposed AdQ-
learninga lgorithm, mean reinforcement value ise q u al 48.883856(±0.029402)
with std. dev. indata equal3 5.792445 for 1482387 measuredvalues.S hapiro-Wilk
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0  1000  2000  3000  4000  5000  6000  7000  8000
Time [s]
Iteration [s]
Queue 1
Queue 2
Queue 3
(a) Q-Learning algorithm
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0  1000  2000  3000  4000  5000  6000  7000  8000
Time [s]
Iteration [s]
Queue 1
Queue 2
Queue 3
(b) AdQL algorithm
Fig. 2. Dynamic Multi-Queue System with constant service time

198 M. Stanek and H. Kwasnicka
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0  1000  2000  3000  4000  5000  6000  7000  8000
Time [s]
Iteration [s]
Queue 1
Queue 2
Queue 3
(a) Q-Learning algorithm
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0  1000  2000  3000  4000  5000  6000  7000  8000
Time [s]
Iteration [s]
Queue 1
Queue 2
Queue 3
(b) AdQL algorithm
Fig. 3. Dynamic Multi-Queue system with exponential service time
normality test pass with p-value equal0 .975256. Fort hose two experiments we
conﬁrmed also that AdQ-learningc an achieves igniﬁcantly better reinforcement
values with conﬁdence level more than9 9.9%. In Fi g. 2 iss e en that the s ys-
tem controlled byA dQ-learningc an better utilize the Q oS requirements, and
best-eﬀort queue obtainsm ore service time which isp a r ticularly evident in early
control stages.F ora ll results the uncertaintyo ft h em e anv alue was calculated
as s¯x =
√
(∑n
i (xi− ¯x)2)/(n(n− 1)).
In the seconds c enario wes witched from deterministicc ontrol strategy, to the
exponentially deﬁned. Each package has drown its service time frome xponential
distribution with meanv alue equal1 .
The compared results form e anw aitingt ime in each queue isp r e s ented in
Fig.3 .T he mea n reinforcement obtained in standard Q -learning was equa l
40.221(±0.032)w ith std. dev. 39.850907.F ors ystem controlled byA dQ-learning
the mean reinforcement value was equal 47.648615(±0.030071) with std. dev.
37.218073. The diﬀerence in the qualityo fc ontrol ise ven more signiﬁcantt h an
it was in the deterministics ystem.T he statistical test proved also that the AdQ-
learning iss igniﬁcantly better than standard Q-learning with conﬁdence level
more than9 9.9%. The AdQ-learninga c hieved lower waitingt ime in best-eﬀort
queue especially in early control stages.
4C o n c l u s i o n
In thisp a p e rwep r opose the re inforcement learningm e t hod which detects
changes in ad ynamice nvironment.T his isd one in order to tune learningp a-
rameters which results in faster convergence to the optimal control strategy.

AdQL – Anomaly Detection Q-Learning in Control Multi-queue Systems 199
The main contribution oft hisa r ticle ist o present AdQ-learninga lgorithm using
Chauvenet’sc riterion for the detection ofs igniﬁcantc h anges in the environment
model.
Weh avee valuated the proposed AdQ-learninga lgorithm in task ofc ontrol dy-
namicm ulti-queue systems. Experimental results proved that control strategies
obtained by the AdQ-learninga r es t a tistically signiﬁcantly better than strate-
gies obtained by standard Q-learninga lgorithm.Further research shouldf ocus on
wider range ofd ynamicc ontrol problems as well as diﬀerenta nomaly detection
criteria.
References
1. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
Cambridge (1998)
2. Watkins, C.: Learning from Delayed Rewards. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge,
England (1989)
3. Kaelbling, L.P., Littman, M.L., Moore, A.P.: Reinforcement learning: A survey.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 4, 237–285 (1996)
4. Sutton, R., Barto, A., Williams, R.: Reinforcement learning is direct adaptive con-
trol. IEEE Control Systems Magazine, 19–22 (1992)
5. Doya, K.: Metalearning and neuromodulation. Neural Netw. 15(4), 495–506 (2002)
6. Murakoshi, K., Mizuno, J.: A parameter control method in reinforcement learning
to rapidly follow unexpected environmental changes. Biosystems 77(1-3), 109–117
(2004)
7. Reinforcement Learning-based Control of Traﬃc Lights in Non-stationary Environ-
ments: A Case Study in a Microscopic Simulator. In: Dunin-Keplicz, B., Omicini,
A., Padget, J.A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 4th European Workshop on Multi-Agent
Systems EUMAS 2006, December 14-15. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, CEUR-
WS.org, vol. 223 (2006)
8. Poprawski, R., Salejda, W.: Zasady opracowania wynik´ ow pomiar´ow. Oﬁcyna
Wydawnicza Politechniki Wroc/suppresslawskiej (2009)
9. Littman, M.L., Dean, T.L., Kaelbling, L.P.: On the complexity of solving markov
decision problems. In: Proc. of the Eleventh International Conference on Uncer-
tainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 394–402 (1995)
10. Levy, H., Sidi, M.: Polling systems: Applications, modelling, and optimization.
IEEE Trans. Commun. 38(10), 1750–1760 (1990)
11. Vishnevskii, V.M., Semenova, O.V.: Mathematical methods to study the polling
systems. Automation and Remote Control 67(2), 173–220 (2006)
12. Documentation, C.I.: Quality of service solution guide, implementing diﬀserv for
end-to-end quality of service, release 12.2, pp. 371–392 (2002)

Two Ensemble Classiﬁers Constructed
from GEP-Induced Expression Trees
Joanna J¸edrzejowicz1 and Piotr J↪edrzejowicz2
1 Institute of Informatics, Gda´nsk University,
Wita Stwosza 57, 80-952 Gda´nsk, Poland
jj@inf.ug.edu.pl
2 Department of Information Systems, Gdynia Maritime University,
Morska 83, 81-225 Gdynia, Poland
pj@am.gdynia.pl
Abstract. In this paper we propose two ensemble classiﬁers using ex-
pression trees as weak classiﬁers. The ﬁrst ensemble uses the AdaBoost
approach and the second makes use of Dempster’ˆa˘A´Zs rule of combina-
tion and applies triplet mass functions to combine classiﬁers. The per-
formance of both ensemble classiﬁers is evaluated experimentally. The
experiment involved 9 well known datasets from the UCI Irvine Machine
Learning Repository. Experiment results show that using GEP-induced
expression trees allows to construct high quality ensemble classiﬁers.
Keywords: gene expression programming, AdaBoost, evidentional
reasoning.
1 Introduction
Genee xpression programming was introduced byF erreira [4] as an automatic
programming approach.A s ith a sb e eno bserved byF erreira [5] the abilityo f
GEP to generate decision trees makes ita natural tool fors olvingc lassiﬁca-
tion problems.F erreira [5] showed some examplea p plications ofG EPi ncluding
classiﬁcation.
Appropriately combining information sources to form a more eﬀective output
than any oft h e individual sources isa n eﬀective approach used in a variety
ofa r e a s.A s Polikar [12]o bserves there are two types ofc lassiﬁer combination:
classiﬁer selection andc lassiﬁer fusion. In classiﬁer selection, each classiﬁer is
trained to become an expert in some local area of the feature space.I n classiﬁer
fusion all classiﬁers are trained over entire feature space.I nthisc a s e, the classiﬁer
combination process involves merging individual( weaker) classiﬁers too btain a
single (stronger) expert ofs u p e riorp e r formance.T he ensemblem e t hodp roposed
in thisp a p e rb elongs to the classiﬁer fusion category. In thisp a p e rwep ropose
two GEP-induced ensemblec lassiﬁers.I n section 2c lassiﬁers induced by gene
expression programminga r ep roposed andd iscussed.I n section 3 two methods
ofc ombiningc lassiﬁers are introduced.I n section 4t h er e s ults of validating
experimenta r es hown. Finally, section 5 containsc onclusions.
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 200–209, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Two Ensemble Classiﬁers Constructed from GEP-Induced Expression Trees 201
2 Using Gene Expression Programming to Induce
Classiﬁers
In [9]GEPw as used fort wo-class classiﬁcation ofd a t awith numerica ndc a t e gori-
cal attributes.I n thisp a p e rt h eg eneral data classiﬁcation problem isc onsidered
with no restriction to two classes.I nw hat follows C ist h es e tofc a t e gorical
classes which are denoted 1, ... ,|C|.W e assume that the learninga lgorithm is
provided with the learning instances LD ={<d ,c> | d∈ D,c∈ C}⊂ D× C,
where D ist h es p a c eof attribute vectors d =( wd
1, ... ,w d
n)w ith wd
i beings ym-
bolic or numeric values.T he learninga lgorithm isu s e dto ﬁndt h eb e s tpossible
approximation ¯f oft h eunknown function f such that f(d)= c.T hen ¯f can
be used to ﬁndt h eclass ¯c = ¯f( ¯d) fora ny ¯d∈ D− LD|D.T he set of learning
instances LD consists oft wo subsets LD = TD∪ TS that is TD -trainings e t
and TS - testings e t.
Asu s u alw hen applyingG EP methodology,the algorithm uses a population of
chromosomes, selects them accordingt o ﬁtness and introduces genetic variation
usings everal genetic operators. Each chromosome isc omposed ofas ingleg ene
(chromosome andg enem e an the same in what follows) divided into two parts as
in the original head-tail method [4]. The size of the head(h)i s determined by the
user with the suggested size not less than the number of attributes in the dataset.
The size oft h et ail (t)i sc omputed as t = h(n−1)+1 where n ist h elargest arity
found in the function set.I n the computational experiments the functionsa r e:
logical AND, OR,X OR,N OR and NOT. Thus n = 2a ndt h esize oft h eg ene
is h + t = 2h +1 .T he terminal set containst riples (o p ,a t t ri b ,c o n s t)w here op
is one ofr elationalo perators <,≤, >,≥,= ,⁄=, attrib is the attribute number,
andﬁ nally const isa value belongingt o the domain of the attribute attrib.A s
usuali n GEP, the tail part ofag e nea lwaysc ontainst e r minalsa ndh e a dc an
haveb oth, terminalsa ndf unctions. Observet h a tin thism odel each gene is
syntactically correct andc orresponds to a valide xpression. Each attribute can
appear once, many times or nota ta ll. To introduce variation in the population
the followingg enetic operators are used:
– mutation,
– transposition of insertion sequence elements (IS transposition),
– roott r ansposition (RIS transposition),
– one-pointr e combination,
– two-pointr e combination.
DuringG EPl earning, the individualsa r es elected andc opied into the nextg en-
eration based on theirﬁ tness andt h eroulette wheel sampling with elitism which
guarantees the survival andc loning oft h eb e s tg ene in the nextg eneration. The
details oft h ea p plied GEPl earningc an be found in [9], [10].
The learning stage isc lass-speciﬁc:
– the ﬁtness function isc lass dependent: forc lass cl andg ene g the value of
fitnesscl(g)i sd e ﬁned as the d iﬀerence between the number ofr owsf rom
class cl for which g is ’true’, andt h enumber ofr owsf romc lasses⁄= cl for
which g is ’true’,

202 J. J¸ edrzejowicz and P. J↪edrzejowicz
– learningt a k e splace separately fore a c hclass cl∈ C and the ﬁrst stepofe a c h
algorithm isd a t ap r e p rocessing: the trainingd a t aTD⊂ LD isd ivided into
|C| sets TD1, ... ,TD |C| containing separately data fromd iﬀerentc lasses.
In the process of learningt h ef ollowing parameters were used:P -the number
of supportingg enes (usually much smaller than the initial size oft h ep opula-
tion), NG -n umber of iterations; pm,pris,pis,pr1,pr2 - denoting the probability
ofm u t a tion, RIS transposition, IStransposition, one-pointa ndt wo-pointr e com-
bination.
Procedure GEP class-oriented
Input: class cl, training data TD with correct labels representing|C| classes,
Output: gene g (best ﬁtting class cl)
create genes of the initial population,
repeat NG times the following:
1. express genes as expression trees, calculate
fitness of each gene with respect to class cl,
2. keep best chromosome,
3. select chromosomes,
4. mutation,
5. transposition of insertion sequence elements
(IS transposition),
6. root transposition (RIS transposition),
7. one-point recombination,
8. two-point recombination.
calculate fitness and keep the best gene g.
The complexityo fG EP procedure is
O(NG×| TD|× psize)( 1 )
where psize ist h esize oft h einitial population ofg enes.
The followinga lgorithm INC (incrementall earning) makes use of the procedure
GEP too btain onec lassiﬁer Cl =( Cl1, ... ,Cl |C|)w here Cli =( gi
1, ... ,g i
ji ) for
i =1 , ... ,|C| is the support forc lass i containing ji≤ P genes.
Algorithm INC (incremental - learning)
Input: training data with correct labels representing|C| classes divided into|C|
subsets TD1, ... ,TD |C|.
Output: classiﬁer Cl.
1. for each class i =1 , ... ,|C| and training data TDi do
1.1 while TDi⁄=∅ and (population size does not exceed P) do
1.1.1 call procedure GEP to find one best gene g for class i,
1.1.2 add g to the population
1.1.3 delete from data set TDi those data for which g evaluates to
’true’
From (1) itf ollows that the complexityo f INCa lgorithm is
O(NG×| TD|2× psize)( 2)

Two Ensemble Classiﬁers Constructed from GEP-Induced Expression Trees 203
3 Combining Classiﬁers
Wem a k eu s eoft wo methods forc ombiningc lassiﬁer decisions.T he ﬁrst one
is AdaBoost (see [12]) which uses the algorithm INCa sas o-called weak clas-
siﬁer.Aw eak classiﬁer can be considerably improved by boosting.T he second
methodm a k e su s eof Dempster’ˆa˘A´Zs rule ofc ombination anda p plies triplet
mass functions (introduced in [2]) to combinec lassiﬁers.
3.1 AdaBoost Used as a Boosting Technique
The generali dea ist o create an ensemble ofc lassiﬁers by resamplingt h et r aining
dataset andc r e a tingac lassiﬁer for each sample.F reunda nd Schapire [6] sug-
gested a reﬁnement ofab oostinga lgorithm called AdaBoost.F orap r e d e ﬁned
number of iterations TT , the followingp rocedures are performed.
Algorithm 1. (GEP AdaBoost)
Input: training dataset
TD ={(xi,y i): yi∈{ 1, ... ,|C|},i =1 , ... ,N}
with N examples and correct labels representing |C| classes, test dataset TS ,
integer TT specifying the number of iterations, M ≤ N -s i z eo ft h es e l e c t e d
dataset.
Output: qc- quality of the AdaBoost classiﬁer.
1. Initialize the distribution
D1(i)= 1
N ,i =1 , ... ,N
2. for t=1 to TT do
2.1 select a training dataset St of size M,
a subset of TD drawn for the current distribution,
2.2 call Algorithm INC for the dataset St,
receive the classifier Ct,
2.3 using the majority voting for Ct calculate the error
of classifier Ct
ϵt =
∑
Ct(xi)⁄=yi
Dt(i)
if ϵt > 0.5 then abort else set βt = ϵt/(1− ϵt)
2.4 update the distribution
if Ct(xi)= yi then Dt(i): = Dt(i)× βt
2.5 normalize the distribution
Dt+1(i)= Dt(i)/Zt,Z t =
∑
i
Dt(i)

204 J. J¸ edrzejowicz and P. J↪edrzejowicz
3. test the ensemble classifier {C1, C2, ...,CTT}
in the test dataset TS
3.1 qc:=0
3.2 for each instance (x,y) from TS
3.2.1 calculate
Vi =
∑
Ct(x)=i
log (1/βt),i =1 , ... ,|C|
3.2.2s e t
c := argmax1≤j≤|C|Vj
3.2.3 if c=y then qc:=qc+1
3.3 qc:=qc/size of TS
Since the complexityo f Algorithm INC is (2) thus fromt h ea bovet h ecomplexity
of Algorithm 1i s
O(TT × NG×| TD|× psize)( 3 )
3.2 Applying Triplet Mass Functions
The idea to apply mass functions isb a s e don the Dempster-Shafer (DS) theoryo f
evidence [13] where evidence isr e p r e s ented in terms ofe vidential functionsa nd ig-
norance. Evidential functions include mass, belief andp lausibility functions, each
conveyingt h es a m einformation as any oft h eothers.T he DS theory formulates
ar e a soningp roc e s sa spieces ofe vidence andh ypotheses allowingt oi nfer con-
clusionsf romt h egiven uncertain evidence.I n this section wed e ﬁneam e t hod of
attachingat r iplet mass function to ag iven classiﬁer Cl andag iveni nstance of
data, then the algorithm ofa p plyingas e t oft riplets to get a class for the data,
andﬁ nally the classiﬁcation algorithm which makes useoft h eformer one.
Given ac lassiﬁer Cl as ano utput ofa lgorithm INC, anda newi nstance of
data d, the decision proﬁle DP (d)i sas t r u c t u r e(notr e ally am a t rix because
rowsa r eofd iﬀerent length,n ote xceeding P)
DP (d)=
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
g1
1(d) ... g1
j1 (d)
... ... ...
gi
1(d) ... gi
ji (d)
... ... ...
g|C|
1 (d) ... g|C|
j|C|
(d)
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
where the row (gi
1(d), ... ,g i
ji (d)) is the support forc lass i.A nd gi
j(d)=1i ft h e
expression tree forg ene gi
j is ’true’ for instance d,o therwise gi
j(d)=0 .T o assign
ac lass label i toi nstance d, the entire decision proﬁle DP (d)i sc onsidered.L et
m(i)=
∑ji
k=1 gi
k(d)
∑|C|
l=1
∑jl
k=1 gl
k(d)
(4)

Two Ensemble Classiﬁers Constructed from GEP-Induced Expression Trees 205
Then the triplet (see [2] for the details) fort h eclassiﬁer Cl and instance d isa n
expression
TCl(d)= <u ,v,C > (5)
where
u = argmax{m(i): 1 ≤ i≤| C|,}v = argmax{m(i): 1 ≤ i≤| C|,u ⁄= v}
m(u)+ m(v)+ m(C)=1
and m ist h em a s sf unction deﬁned in (4).
Any two triplets T1, T2 are combined to form a new triplet.
Deﬁnition 1. Let T1 =<x 1,y1,C > , T2 =<x 2,y2,C > be two triplets with
respective mass functionsm1, m2.T h e nT is a new triplet with a mass function
m1⊕ m2. Consider the following possible cases:
1. two focal points equal, that is x1 = x2, y1 = y2, x1⁄= y1
Then the mass functions are not in conﬂict if
m1(x1)· m2(y2)+ m1(y1)· m2(x2) < 1
and T =<x 1,y1,C > with
m1⊕ m2(x1): = K· (m1(x1)· m2(x2)+ m1(x1)· m2(C)+ m1(C)· m2(x2))
m1⊕ m2(y1): = K· (m1(y1)· m2(y2)+ m1(y1)· m2(C)+ m1(C)· m2(y2))
where
m1(C)=1 − m1(x1)− m1(y1),m2(C)=1 − m2(x2)− m2(y2)
K−1 =1− m1(x1)· m2(y2)− m1(y1)· m2(x2)
2. one focal point equal, that is x1 = x2, y1⁄= y2. Then the mass functions are
not in conﬂict if
m1(x1)· m2(y2)+ m1(y1)· m2(y2)+ m1(y1)· m2(x2) < 1
Let
f(x1): = K· (m1(x1)· m2(x2)+ m1(x1)· m2(C)+ m1(C)· m2(x2))
f(y1): = K· m1(y1)· m2(C),f (y2): = K· m1(C)· m2(y2)
where
K−1 =1 − m1(x1)· m2(y2)− m1(y1)· m2(y2)− m1(y1)· m2(x2)
Let
x = argmax(f(x1),f (y1),f (y2))
y = argmax{f(t): t∈{ x1,y1,y2},t⁄= x}
Then the new triplet
T =<x ,y,C >
m1⊕ m2(x): = f(x),m1⊕ m2(y): = f(y)
m1⊕ m2(C)=1 − m1⊕ m2(x)− m1⊕ m2(y)

206 J. J¸ edrzejowicz and P. J↪edrzejowicz
3. completely diﬀerent focal points, x1⁄= x2, y1⁄= y2. Then the mass functions
are not in conﬂict if
m1(x1)· m2(x2)+ m1(x1)· m2(y2)+ m1(y1)· m2(x2)+ m1(y1)· m2(y2) < 1
Let
f(x1): = K· m1(x1)· m2(C),f (y1): = K· m1(y1)· m2(C)
f(x2): = K· m1(C)· m2(x2),f (y2): = K· m1(C)· m2(y2)
where
K−1 =1−m1(x1)·m2(x2)−m1(x1)·m2(y2)−m1(y1)·m2(x2)−m1(y1)·m2(y2)
Let
x = argmax(f(x1),f (y1),f (x2),f (y2))
y = argmax{f(t): t∈{ x1,y1,x2,y2},t⁄= x}
And the new triplet
T =<x ,y,C >
m1⊕ m2(x)= f(x),m1⊕ m2(y)= f(y)
m1⊕ m2(C)=1 − m1⊕ m2(x)− m1⊕ m2(y)
Algorithm. CT (classiﬁcation with triplet mass functions)
Input: T classiﬁers Cl1, ... ,ClT , new instance of data d,
Output: class c.
let curr_triplet be a triplet corresponding to Cl1
1. for i:=2 to T do
1.1 n_triplet:= triplet corresponding to Cli
1.2 curr_triplet:=combination of curr_triplet and n_triplet
as defined in Definition 1
2. let c be the first focal point of curr_triplet
Algorithm 2. (Triplet Ensemble)
Input: training dataset
TD ={(xi,y i): yi∈{ 1, ... ,|C|},i =1 , ... ,N}
with N examples and correct labels representing |C| classes, test dataset TS,
integer T specifying the number of classiﬁers (also, triplets),
Output: qc- quality of the classiﬁer.
1. for i=1 to T do
call Algorithm INC for the dataset TD,
receive the classifier Cli,
2. test the ensemble classifier {Cl1, Cl2, ...,ClT}
in the test dataset TS
2.1 qc:=0
2.2 for each instance (x,y) from TS
2.2.1 use algorithm CT to find class c
2.2.2 if c=y then qc:=qc+1
2.3 qc:=qc/size of TS

Two Ensemble Classiﬁers Constructed from GEP-Induced Expression Trees 207
Since the complexityo f Algorithm CTi s O(T) thus can be neglected in comparison
with the complexityo f Algorithm INC (2) andt h ecomplexityo f Algorithm 2 is
O(T× NG×| TD|2× psize)( 6 )
4 Computational Experiment Results
The performance ofb oth discussed ensemblec lassiﬁers was evaluated experi-
mentally. The experiment involved 9w ell known datasets fromt h eUCII rvine
Machine LearningR e pository[ 1 ] .
The experimentp lanw as based on 10 independent repetitions oft h et en-fold
cross validation scheme fore a c hb enchmark dataset ande a c hensemblec lassiﬁer.
Performance criteria were percentage ofc orrect classiﬁcationsa nd its standard
Table 1. Values of ensemble-speciﬁc parameters
datasets
 ensemble
 GEP population
 Other parameters
size/no.iter
WBC, A. Credit
 GEP AdaBoost
 30/100
 M=50, TT=25
G. Credit, CMC
WBC, A. Credit
 Triplet ensemble
 100/80
 T=4
G. Credit, CMC
Heart, Pima
 GEP AdaBoost
 20/50
 M=70, TT=15
Heart, Pima
 Triplet ensemble
 50/100
 T=3
Ecoli, Glass
 GEP AdaBoost
 250/200
 M=20, TT=15
Ecoli, Glass
 Triplet ensemble
 50/60
 T=4
Lung
 GEP AdaBoost
 100/50
 M=20, TT=20
Lung
 Triplet ensemble
 200/150
 T=5
Table 2. The performance of the proposed ensem ble classiﬁers (%correct classiﬁca-
tions)
Dataset
 GEP Adaboost
 Triplet ensemble
 Reported
% correct
 st.dev
 % correct
 st.dev
 % correct
WBC
 97.7
 2.15
 96.7
 2.49
 97.0 [15]
Australian Credit
 89.3
 2.98
 87.8
 2.09
 86.1 [14]
German Credit
 80.5
 4.27
 73.5
 4.19
 79.5 [3]
Heart
 85.7
 3.86
 79.2
 2.36
 82.2 [16]
Lung
 80.2
 1.70
 83.5
 1.73
 57.6 [16]
CMC
 58.2
 4.03
 56.7
 3.87
 55.7 [11]
Ecoli
 79.4
 3.83
 74.9
 2.65
 84.4 [7]
PIMA
 78.0
 5.31
 69.46
 4.17
 75.1 [16]
Glass
 64.2
 3.82
 59.6
 6.75
 62.9 [8]

208 J. J¸ edrzejowicz and P. J↪edrzejowicz
deviation averaged over all 100 runs.T he experiment was carried out on as t an-
dard PC.V alues oft h eG EP-speciﬁc parameters includingp robabilities ofm u-
tation, RIS and IS transpositions,o ne-pointa ndt wo-pointr e combinations were
in all cases identical ands e tto as follows: pm =0 . 1 ,pris = pis = pr1 = pr2 =
0.2.P opulation size,n umber of iterationsa nd other ensemble-speciﬁc parameter
values were set to assure that the computation time ofas ingler unw ould not
exceed 60 s.T heir values are shown in Table 1.
In Table2t h ep e r formance of the proposed ensemblec lassiﬁers are shown and
compared with some literature reported results.
5 Conclusions
The reported research allowst o draw the followingc onclusions:
– Genee xpression programming isau s e f ul andp r a c tical tool toi nduce ex-
pression trees.
– UsingG EP-induced expression trees allowst o construct high quality ensem-
blec lassiﬁers.
– The proposed GEPA daBoost algorithm in most cases outperforms GEP-
based triplet ensemblea lgorithm.
Future research shouldf ocus on integrating the proposed algorithms with the
feature andt r aining vectors reduction algorithms in order to achieve yet better
performance of the suggested ensemblec lassiﬁers.
References
1. Asuncion, A., Newman, D.J.: UCI Machine Learning Repository, University of
California, School of Information and Computer Science (2007) http://www.ics.
uci.edu/~mlearn/MLRepository.html
2. Bi, Y., Guan, J., Bell, D.: The combination of multiple classiﬁers using an eviden-
tional reasoning approach. Artif. Intell. 172, 1731–1751 (2008)
3. Centeno, P., Lawrence, N.D.: Optimising Kernel Parameters and Regularisation
Coeﬃcients for Non-linear Discriminant Analysis. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 7, 455–491 (2006)
4. Ferreira, C.: Gene Expression Programming: a New Adaptive Algorithm for Solving
Problems. Complex Systems 13(2), 87–129 (2001)
5. Ferreira, C.: Gene Expression Programming. Studies in Computational Intell. 21,
337–380 (2006)
6. Freund, Y., Schapire, R.E.: Decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning
and application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Science 55, 119–139
(1997)
7. FT Datasets: http://www.grappa.univ-lille3.fr/~torre/Recherche/
Experiments/Results/tables.php
8. Ishibuchi, H., Nojima, Y.: Analysis of Interpretability-accuracy Tradeoﬀ of Fuzzy
Systems by Multiobjective Fuzzy Genetics-based Machine Learning. Intern. Jour-
nal of Approximate Reasoning 44, 4–31 (2007)

Two Ensemble Classiﬁers Constructed from GEP-Induced Expression Trees 209
9. Jedrzejowicz, J., Jedrzejowicz, P.: GEP-induced expression trees as weak classiﬁers.
In: Perner, P. (ed.) ICDM 2008. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 5077, pp. 129–141. Springer,
Heidelberg (2008)
10. Jedrzejowicz, J., Jedrzejowicz, P.: A Family of GEP-induced Ensemble Classiﬁers.
In: Nguyen, N.T., Kowalczyk, R., Chen, S.-M. (eds.) ICCCI 2009. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (LNAI), vol. 5796, pp. 641–652. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)
11. Kretowski, M.: SOFSEM 2008. LNCS, vol. 4910, pp. 531–540. Springer, Heidelberg
(2008)
12. Polikar, R.: Ensemble Based Systems in Decision Making. IEEE Circuits and Sys-
tems Magazine 3, 22–43 (2006)
13. Shafer, G.: A Mathematical Theory of Evidence. Princeton University Press,
Princeton (1976)
14. Torre, F.: Boosting Correct Least General Generalizations, Technical Report
GRApp A-0104, Grenoble (2004)
15. Weinert, W.R., Lopes, H.S.: GEPCLASS: A Classiﬁcation Rule Discovery Tool
Using Gene Expression Programming. In: Li, X., Za ¨ıane, O.R., Li, Z.-h. (eds.)
ADMA 2006. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 4093, pp. 871–880. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
16. Zhou, C., Xiao, W., Tirpak, T.M., Nelson, P.C.: Evolving Accurate and Compact
Classiﬁcation Rules with Gene Expression Programming. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation 7(6), 519–531 (2003)

Experimental Evaluation of the A-Team Solving
Instances of the RCPSP/max Problem
EwaR a t ajczak-Ropel
Department of Information Systems
Gdynia Maritime University, Poland
ewra@am.gdynia.pl
Abstract. The paper proposes an agent-based approach to solving in-
stances of the RCPSP/max problem. Since the problem is known to be
NP-hard, the proposed solution takes advantage of the parallel and dis-
tributed computations abilities of the E-JABAT which is a middleware
supporting the construction of the dedicated A-Team architectures based
on the population-based approach. In this paper the E-JABAT-based
A-Team architecture dedicated for solving the RCPSP/max problem in-
stances is proposed and experimentally validated. Computational exper-
iment involves evaluation of the inﬂuence of the time used to solve the
problem on the results obtained. The paper contains the RCPSP/max
problem formulation, overview of the E-JABAT environment, descrip-
tion of the E-JABAT architecture for solving the RCPSP/max problem
instances and a discussion of the computational experiment results.
1 Introduction
The paper pr oposes an agent-based approach to solving instances oft h er e-
source constrained project schedulingp roblem with minimal andm aximal time
lags (time windows) known in the literature as the RCPSP/max. RCPSP/max
has attracted a lot of attention andm any exact andh e u ristica lgorithms have
been recently proposed fors olving it (see fore xample [5], [12], [15]). Since the
problem isk nown to be NP-hard the approaches proposed so far produce either
approximate solutions orc an be applied fors olving instances oft h elimited size.
Hence, searchingf orm ore eﬀectivea lgorithms ands olutionst o the RCPSP/max
problem iss till a lively ﬁeld of research. One of the promisingd irections ofs u c h
research ist o take advantage of the parallel andd istributed computation abili-
ties,w hich are the feature oft h econtemporary multiple-agents ystems.
The multiple-agents ystems are ani mportanta nd intensively expandinga r e a
of research andd evelopment.T here isa number ofm ultiple-agent approaches
proposed to solved iﬀerentt ypes of optimization problems. One oft h e mist h e
concept ofa n asynchronous team (A-Team), originally introduced in [14]. The
A-Team paradigm was used to developt h eJADE-based environmentf ors olving
a varietyo fc omputationally hard optimization problems called E-JABAT ([2],
[3]). E-JABAT isam iddleware supportingt h econstruction of the dedicated A-
Team architectures based on the population-based approach.T he mobile agents
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 210–219, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Experimental Evaluation of the A-Team Solving RCPSP/max 211
used in E-JABAT allow for decentralization ofc omputationsa ndu s eofm ultiple
hardware platforms in parallel, resultinge ventually in more eﬀectiveu s eoft h e
availabler e sources and reduction oft h ecomputation time.
In thisp a p e rt h eE-JABAT-based A-Team architecture dedicated fors olving
the RCPSP/max problem instances isp roposed ande xperimentally validated.
To solve instances oft h eR CPSP/max diﬀerent optimization agents are used.
Optimization agents representh e u ristica lgorithms.T he proposed architecture
isb a s e don the previous onep roposed in [10]. T he implementation oft h ea r-
chitecture andh e u ristics used haveb e en extended and improved.T he proposed
approach has beenv alidated experimentally usingd iﬀerentc omputation times.
Section 2 of the paper containst h eR CPSP/max problem formulation. Section
3 gives some information on E-JABAT environment.S ection 4p rovides details
oft h eE-JABAT architecture implemented fors olvingt h eR CPSP/max prob-
lem instances.S ection 5 describes computational experimentc a r ried-out with
a view tov alidate the pr oposed approach.S ection 6 containsc onclusionsa nd
suggestionsf or future research.
2 Problem Formulation
In the RCPSP/max problem a set of n + 2a c tivities V ={0, 1, ... ,n ,n +1} is
considered. Each activity has to be processed without interruption to complete
the project.T he dummy activities 0 and n +1 representt h eb e ginninga ndt h e
end of the project.T he duration ofa n activity j, j =0 , ... ,n +1i sd enoted by
dj where d0 = dn+1 =0 .T here are r renewabler e source types.T he availability
ofe a c hr e source type k in each time per iod is rk units, k =1 , ... ,r . Each
activity j requires rj,k units ofr e source k duringe a c hp e riod of its duration,
where r0,k = rn+1,k =0 , k =1 , ...,r . Each activity j∈ V has a start t ime sj
which isad e cision variable.T here are generalized precedence relations (temporal
constraints)o ft h es t a r t-to-start type sj− si≥ δij, δij ∈ Z, deﬁned between the
activities.
The structure ofap r oject can be represented by an activity-on-node net-
work G =( V,A ), where V ist h es e tofa c tivities and A ist h es e tof precedence
relationships.T he objective ist o ﬁnd a schedu le ofa c tivities start ingt imes
S =[ s0, ... ,s n+1], where s0 =0( project alwaysb e ginsa tt ime zero) andr e-
source constraints are satisﬁed, such that the schedule duration T(S)= sn+1 is
minimized.T he detailed description of the problem can be found in [11].
The RCPSP/max, as an extension oft h eR CPSP, belongs to the class of
NP-hard optimization problems ([1], [4]). The objective ist o ﬁndam a k e s p an
minimal schedule that meets the constraints imposed by the precedence relations
andt h elimited resource availabilities.
3E - J A B A T E n v i r o n m e n t
E-JABATisam iddlewarea llowingto designand implementA-Team architectures
fors olving various combinatorialo ptimization problems.T he problem-solving

212 E. Ratajczak-Ropel
Fig. 1. E-JABAT use case diagram
paradigm on which the pr oposed system is based ca n be best deﬁ ned as the
population-based approach.
E-JABAT produces solutionst o combinatorialo ptimization problems usinga
set of optimization agents, each representinga ni mprovementa lgorithm. Each
improvement (optimization) algorithm when supplied with a potential solution
to the problem at hand, tries toi mprovet hiss olution. An initial population of
solutions (individuals)i sg enerated orc onstructed.I ndividualsf orminga ni n itial
population are, at the followingc omputation stages,i mproved byi ndependently
acting agents.M ain functionalityo f the proposed environment includes organiz-
inga ndc onducting the process ofs e a r c hfort h eb e s tsolution.
To perform the ab ove described cyclet wo main classes of agents are used .
The ﬁrst class called OptiAgent isab a s eclass fora ll optimization agents.T he
secondc lass called SolutionManager isu s e dto create agents orc lasses of agents
responsiblef orm aintenance andu p d a ting individuals in the common memory.
All agents act in parallel. Each OptiAgentr e p r e s ents a single improvementa l-
gorithm (fore xample: simulated annealing, tabu search, genetica lgorithm etc.).
The main agents andt h eirr oles in the E-JABAT are presented as use case
diagram in the Figure 1.
Other importantc lasses in E-JABAT include:T ask representinga ni nstance
oras e t of instances of the problem and Solution representingt h esolution. To
initialize the agents andm aintain the system the TaskManager and Platform-
Manager classes are used. Objects oft h ea bovec lasses also act as age nts.U p
ton o wthe E-JABAT environmenth a sb e en used to solve instances oft h efol-
lowingp roblems: the resource-constrained project schedulingp roblem (RCPSP),
the travelings alesman problem (TSP), the clusteringp roblem (CP), the vehicle
routingp roblem (VRP).

Experimental Evaluation of the A-Team Solving RCPSP/max 213
E-JABATenvironmenth a sb e en designed and implemented using JADE (Java
Agent Development Framework), which isas oftware framework supportingt h e
implementation o fm ulti-agents ystems.M o re deta iled information about E -
JABAT environmenta nd its implementationsc an be found in [7], [2] and [3].
4 E-JABAT Architecture to Solving the RCPSP/max
Problem
E-JABAT environment was successfully used fors olvingR CPSP, MRCPSP and
RCPSP/max problems (see [8], [10]). T he approach proposed in thisp a p e ris
the continuation of the research descr ibed in [10]. T he architecture has bee n
extended and improved.
To use the E -JABAT environmentt h r e es e t sofc lasses haveb e en designed
andc oded:
– classes describing the problem,
– classes describingt h eontologies,
– optimization agents.
All these haveb e eni mplemented as E-JABAT objects.T he aboves e t sofc lasses
forms the package called RCPSPmax.
Classes describing the problem are responsiblef orr e a ding the data, prepro-
cessing the data andg eneratingr andom instances of the problem.T he discussed
set includes the followingc lasses:
– RCPSPmaxTask inheritingf romt h eTask class andr e p r e s entingt h einstance
of the problem,
– RCPSPmaxSolution inheritingf romt h eSolution class andr e p r e s entingt h e
solution of the problem instance,
– Activity representingt h ea c tivityo f the problem,
– Resource representingt h er enewabler e source,
– PredSucc representing the predecessor or successor oft h ea c tivity.
The nexts e tincludes classes allowingf ord e ﬁnition oft h evocabulary ands e-
mantics fort h econtent of messages exchange between agents.I n the proposed
approach the messages include all data representingt h et a s kands olution. The
discussed set includes the followingc lasses:
– RCPSPmaxTaskOntologyi nheritingf romt h eTaskOntology class,
– RCPSPmaxSolutionOntologyi nheritingf romt h eSolutionOntology class,
The last set includes classes describingt h eoptimization agents. Each oft h e m
includes the implementation ofa no ptimization heuristicu s e dto solve the prob-
lem.A l loft h e ma r einheritingf romO p tiAgentc lass.I n the considered case this
set includes the followingc lasses:
– optiLSA denotingt h eLocalS earch Algorithm (LSA),
– optiTSA denotingt h eTabu Search Algorithm (TSA),

214 E. Ratajczak-Ropel
– optiPRA denoting Path Relinking Algorithm (PRA),
– opiGEPA denotingG eneE xpression Programming Algorithm (GEPA).
The algorithms LSA, PRA andG EPAproposed in [10]has been slightly modiﬁed,
however theirm ain steps remain the same.T he pseudo-code of the proposed TSA
isp r e s ented in Figure 2.T he description oft h ealgorithms can be foundb elow.
The LSA isas imple local search algorithm which ﬁnds the localo ptimum by
movinge a c ha c tivity to all possiblep laces in the schedule.F ore a c hcombination
ofa c tivities the value ofp ossibles olution isc alculated.T he best schedu le is
returned.
The TSA isa ni mplementation oft a b us e a r c halgorithm (Figure 2). Ast h e
initial parameters the instance ofs olution (initialSolution) andt h enumber of
iteration in which no better solution isf ound (iterationNumber ) haveb e en used.
In each iteration all possiblem oves fort h econsidered solution S andt h ea c tivity
ai (neighborhood N(S, ai)) are checked.T he move isd e ﬁned as an exchange of
two activities where the precedence andr e source constraints are satisﬁed.T he
move(pi,a i,p j,a j,v,t t p) denotes the e xchange ofa c tivity ai fromp osition pi
with activity aj fromp osition pj after which the value ofs olution S will equal to
v (move value). The tt means the tabu tenure which isc alculated as the percent
(ttp)o f iterationNumber for which the move is rememberedon tabuList.S etting
the value to0 means that the variable is notu s e din thisp a r toft h ealgorithm.
The best movef romt h eneighborhood which is nott a b uisc hosen andp e r formed.
The list oft a b umoves is updated after perf ormingt h emove.F ore xamplea ll
possiblem oves ofa c tivity ai and aj are added to tabu list for 5% oft h enumber
of iterations, anda ll possiblem oves (exchanges)o fa c tivity ai with aj are added
to the tabu list for 10% oft h enumber of iterations.
The PRAi sa ni mplementation of the path -relinkinga lgorithm.F orap a ir
ofs olutionsap a t hb e tween them isc onstructed.T he path consists ofs c h e d ules
obtained by carrying out a singlem ovef rom the precedings c h e d ule.T he move is
understooda sm oving one oft h ea c tivities to a new position. Fore a c hs c h e d ule
in the path the value of the respectives olution isc h e c k e d.T he best schedule is
remembered andﬁ nally returned.
The GEPA isa ni mplementation oft h eg enee xpression program based on the
genee xpression programming idea proposed in [6]. The algorithm was described
in details in [9]. T he initial population oft h eG EPA consists of one individ-
ual selected from the currentc ontent oft h eE-JABAT common memoryw here
population ofp ossibles olutions iss tored, andt h er e s tg enerated randomly. The
individual( solution) fromt h eE -JABAT population ist r ansformed into GEP
individual representation. Next, the wholep opulation ise volved usingG EPo p-
erators:o nep oint, two pointa nd n-pointr e combination, restricted permutation,
inversion, gened eletion/insertion andm u t a tion. Each oft h eoperators isu s e dto
produce ano ﬀspringt o the ﬁxed percent of individualsc r e a ting nextg eneration.
To calculate the ﬁtness ofa ni ndividual the function fx = Tg− tx +1i su s e d,
where x ist h eindividual, tx ist h elength of the schedulea nd Tg ist h elength
oft h elargest schedulee ncoded in the chromosomes of the currentp opulation.
The best schedule is remembered andﬁ nally returned.

Experimental Evaluation of the A-Team Solving RCPSP/max 215
TSA(initialSolution, iterationNumber )
{
S=initialSolution
ai=1
iwi=iterationNumber
minc=T (initialSolution) //value of the solution
tabuList=∅
while(iwi>0)
{
Choose the best move from the neighborhood N (S,ai) which is not
tabu and denote as bestMove (pi,ai,pj ,aj ,v,0)
Update tabuList:
for(all moves in tabuList) tt-
Remove the moves with tt==0
if(bestMove is set & bestMove .v<minc · 1.2)
{
Make bestMove on S
if(bestMove .v<minc)
{
bestS=S
minc=T (bestS)
iwi=iterationNumber
Update tabuList:
Add move(any,ai,any,any,0,80%)
Add move(any,aj ,any,any,0,80%)
Add move(any,any,any,ai,0,80%)
Add move(any,any,any,aj ,0,80%)
}
else iwi-
Update tabuList:
Add move(any,ai,any,any,0,5%)
Add move(any,aj ,any,any,0,5%)
Add move(any,ai,any,aj ,0,10%)
Add move(any,aj ,any,ai,0,10%)
Add move(pi,ai,pj ,aj ,0,30%)
Add move(pj ,aj ,pi,ai,0,30%)
}
else iwi-
iwi++
ai++
}
}
Fig. 2. Pseudo code of TSA algorithm

216 E. Ratajczak-Ropel
All o ptimization agents c o-operate t ogether us ingt h eE -JABAT common
memory during the pr ocess ofs e a r c hingf ort h eb e s tsolution to the problem
instance.I n the common memory the population of individuals (solutions)i s
stored.T he initial population in the common memoryi sg enerated randomly
with the exception ofaf e wi ndividuals which are generated by heuristics based
on the priority rules [11]. Because itm ight be diﬃcultt oo btain feasibles olution
fors ome RCPSP/max problem instances, the randomd r awing ofa ni ndividual
could be repeated several times.I ft hisd oes notp roduce a feasibles olution the
infeasible ones are added t o the population in the common memory. All the
proposed improvementa lgorithms can use infeasibles olutionsa sa ni n itial seed.
Individuals in the common memory are represented as schedules ofa c tivities.
The ﬁnal solution is obtained from the schedu leb yS GSU (Serial Generation
Scheme with Unscheduling)[ 1 1 ] .
The time andf r e q u ency an agent ofe a c hkind receives a solution ors e tof
solutionsf romt h ecommon memoryw ith a view toi mprove its qualityi s deter-
mined by the strategy. Fors olvingt h eR CPSP/max problem instances the so
called basics t r a t e gy has been used where individualsf orwarded too ptimization
agents for improvement are randomly chosen fromt h epopulation stored in the
common memory. Such individualsa r eb eings entt o these optimization agents
which are ready to start searchingf or a better solution. After computation the
improved individual replaces the worst ones tored in the common memory.
5 Computational Experiment Results
To validate the proposed approach the computational experimenth a sb e en car-
ried out usingb e nchmark instances ofR CPSP/max from PSPLIB [13] ( test
sets j10, j 20 and j30). The e xperiment involved computation with the ﬁ xed
number of optimization agents representing LSA, TSA, PRA andG EPA algo-
rithms, basics t r a t e gy, two population sizes, andd iﬀerentt ime periods allowed
forc ompputation.
The discussed results haveb e eno btained using4 optimization agents:o ne of
the LSA, one oft h eTSA, one oft h ePRA and one oft h eG EPA. Population of
solutions in the common memory consisting of2 5o r 50 individualsh a sb e en used.
The basics t r a t e gy has been used as described in section 4.T he computation has
beeni nterrupted if better solution hasn’tb e en founda f t e r15, 30 and 60 seconds,
respectively. The optimization algorithms haveh a daﬁ xed parameter values
described in section 4 but the number of iteration fore a c hoft h e mh a sb e en
chosen randomly fromt h einterval[ 1 0, 50] in the case of LSA andG EPA and
from [10, 200] for TSA. The population ofG EPA consists of 50 GEPi ndividuals.
The computation results haveb e en evaluated in terms oft h em e an relative
error (Mean RE) calculated as the deviation fromt h elower bound, percent of
feasibles olutions (% FS), mean total computation time (Mean total CT) and
mean computation time needed to foundt h eb e s tsolution (Mean CT). Each
instance has bee n solved ﬁvet imes andt h er e s ults presented in Table 1 have
been averaged over these solutions.

Experimental Evaluation of the A-Team Solving RCPSP/max 217
Table 1. Experiment results obtained for 15 seconds
#Activities Population size Mean RE % FS Mean total CT Mean CT
10 25 0.32% 100% 9.0s 0.2s
20 25 4.60% 100% 9.0s 2.2s
30 25 10.10% 100% 11.7s 5.0s
10 50 0.32% 100% 5.9s 0.2s
20 50 4.68% 100% 8.7s 1.8s
30 50 10.66% 100% 10.3s 3.6s
Table 2. Experiment results obtained for 30 seconds
#Activities Population size Mean RE % FS Mean total CT Mean CT
10 25 0.32% 100% 17.9s 0.2s
20 25 4.30% 100% 16.2s 2.7s
30 25 9.53% 100% 20.1s 7.1s
10 50 0.32% 100% 11.6s 0.1s
20 50 4.36% 100% 16.3s 2.6s
30 50 10.06% 100% 18.6s 5.4s
Table 3. Experiment results obtained for 60 seconds
#Activities Population size Mean RE % FS Mean total CT Mean CT
10 25 0.32% 100% 23.2s 0.2s
20 25 4.25% 100% 30.4s 3.3s
30 25 9.13% 100% 37.7s 11.9s
10 50 0.32% 100% 23.2s 0.2s
20 50 4.16% 100% 31.6s 4.5s
30 50 9.28% 100% 37.9s 11.9s
Table 4. Results obtained by ISES [5]
#Activities Mean RE % FS Mean CT
10 0.99% 100.00% 0.71s
20 4.99% 100.00% 4.48s
30 10.37% 100.00% 22.68s
Experimenth a sb e en carried out using4 nodes oft h ecluster Holk oft h eTri-
cityA cademicC omputer Network built of2 56 IntelI tanium 2Dual Core 1.4G Hz
with 12 MB L3 cache processors and with Mellanox InﬁniBand interconnections
with 10Gb/sb andwidth.

218 E. Ratajczak-Ropel
Table 5. C-BEST results [5]
#Activities Mean RE % FS Mean CT
10 0.00% 100.00% –
20 3.97% 100.00% –
30 8.91% 100.00% –
The experimentr e s ults obtained by the E-JABAT based A-Team are shown
in Tables 1-3 .T he results can be compared with the results reported in the
literature.S uch a comparison are presented in Table4 .I nT able 5 the optimal
results are presented.
6 Conclusions
Experimentr e s ults show that the proposed E-JABAT based A-Team implemen-
tation isa n eﬀectivet ool fors olving instances oft h eR CPSP/max problem.
Presented results are better then the best solutionsk nown fromt h eliterature.
Itc an be alson oticed that they are obtained in as horter time.T ime comparisons
are however diﬃcults ince the discussed implementation haveb e en usingd iﬀer-
ent numbers andk inds ofp rocessors.I n case of the agent-based environments
the signiﬁcantp a r toft h etime isu s e dfor agentc ommunication which has an
inﬂuence on both - computation time andq u alityo fr e s ults.
Investigatingt h er e s ults itc an be noticed that the size oft h epopulation in
the common memory shouldb es e lected in accordance with the t ime allowed
forc omputations.I n case oft h etime periods of 15 and 30 seconds the results
obtained with 50 individualsh aveb e enw orse theni n case of2 5i ndividuals.F or
the computation lasting 60 seconds the results obtained by5 0i ndividualsh ave
been better then these produced by 25. Interesting isa lso the fact of obtaining
the same results for 10 activities (j10) fora ll cases.I t indicates that algorithms
shouldb e improved ort h enumber of iteration shouldb e increased.
It is worth noticingt h a tin this implementation the main disadvantage oft h e
approach presented in [10],that ist h epossible lack ofs olutions in some cases, has
been eliminated.I n all cases the 100% off e a sibles olutionsh aveb e eno btained.
The main advantage ofb oth approaches isq uite simple implementation oft h e
optimization algorithms.
Future research will concentrate on ﬁnding, testinga nda d dingt o E-JABAT
more diﬀerent optimization agents and improvingt h eexisting ones.M ore ex-
periments are needed to establish rules on ﬁndinga no ptimal conﬁguration:
population, time perioda nd number of optimization agents best suited to the
availablec omputational resources.
Acknowledgments. Calculationsh aveb e en performed in the AcademicC om-
puter Centre TASK in Gdansk.

Experimental Evaluation of the A-Team Solving RCPSP/max 219
References
1. Bartusch, M., Mohring, R.H., Radermacher, F.J.: Scheduling Project Networks
with Resource Constraints and Time Windows. Annual Operational Research 16,
201–240 (1988)
2. Barbucha, D., Czarnowski, I., Jedrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak, E., Wierzbowska, I.:
JADE-Based A-Team as a Tool for Implementing Population-Based Algorithms.
In: VI International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications,
vol, vol. 3, pp. 144–149. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos (2006)
3. Barbucha, D., Czarnowski, I., Jedrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak-Ropel, E., Wierzbowska,
I.: E-JABAT – An Implementation of the Web-Based A-Team. In: Nguyen, N.T.,
Jain, L.C. (eds.) Intelligent Agents in the Evolution of Web and Applications, pp.
57–86. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)
4. Blazewicz, J., Lenstra, J., Rinnooy, A.: Scheduling Subject to Resource Constraints:
Classiﬁcation and Complexity. Discrete Applied Mathematics 5, 11–24 (1983)
5. Cesta, A., Oddi, A., Smith, S.F.: A Constraint-Based Method for Project Schedul-
ing with Time Windows. Journal of Heuristics 8, 108–136 (2002)
6. Ferreira, C.: Gene Expression Programming: Mathematical Modeling by an Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence, 2nd edn. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
7. Jedrzejowicz, P., Wierzbowska, I.: JADE-Based A-Team Environment. In: Alexan-
drov, V.N., van Albada, G.D., Sloot, P.M.A., Dongarra, J. (eds.) ICCS 2006. LNCS,
vol. 3993, pp. 719–726. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
8. Jedrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak, E.: Agent-Based Approach to Solving the Resource
Constrained Project Scheduling Problem. In: Beliczynski, B., Dzielinski, A.,
Iwanowski, M., Ribeiro, B. (eds.) ICANNGA 2007. LNCS, vol. 4431, pp. 480–487.
Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
9. Jedrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak-Ropel, E.: Agent Based Gene Expression Programming
for Solving the RCPSP/max Problem. In: Kolehmainen, M., et al. (eds.) Adap-
tive and Natural Computing Algorithms. LNCS, vol. 5495, pp. 203–212. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009)
10. Jedrzejowicz, P., Ratajczak-Ropel, E.: Solving the RCPSP/max Problem by the
Team of Agents. In: H˚akansson, A., Nguyen, N.T., Hartung, R.L., Howlett, R.J.,
Jain, L.C. (eds.) KES-AMSTA 2009. LNCS, vol. 5559, pp. 734–743. Springer, Hei-
delberg (2009)
11. Neumann, K., Schwindt, C., Zimmermann, J.: Project Scheduling with Time Win-
dows and Scarce Resources, 2nd edn. Springer, Heidelberg (2003)
12. Neumann, K., Schwindt, C., Zimmermann, J.: Resource-Constrained Project
Scheduling with Time Windows, Recent Developments and New Applications.
In: Perspectives in Modern Project Scheduling, pp. 375–407. Springer, Heidelberg
(2006)
13. PSPLIB, http://129.187.106.231/psplib
14. Talukdar, S., Baerentzen, L., Gove, A., de Souza, P.: Asynchronous Teams: Co-
operation Schemes for Autonomous, Com puter-Based Agents. Technical Report
EDRC 18-59-96. Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh (1996)
15. Valls, V., Ballestin, F., Barrios, A.: An Evolutionary Algorithm for the Resource-
Constrained Project Scheduling Problem Subject to Temporal Constraints.
In.: PMS 2006, Tenth International Workshop on Project Management and
Scheduling, pp. 363–369. Nakom, Poznan (2006)

Early Warning of Cardiac Problems in a Crowd
Przemys/suppresslaw Gawro´nski, Khalid Saeed, and Krzysztof Ku/suppresslakowski
Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science,
AGH University of Science and Technology,
al. Mickiewicza 30, PL-30059 Krak´ow, Poland
gawron@newton.ftj.agh.edu.pl, saeed@agh.edu.pl,
kulakowski@novell.ftj.agh.edu.pl
Abstract. We propose a new system of early warning of the presence
of persons with heart problems in a crowd. Such a person is detected
by a signal from her/his personal intelligent device, which continuously
measures the cardiac activity. Once the signal is abnormal, the warning
is transmitted to devices of neighboring persons, who can react. The sim-
ulation of crowd dynamics is based on the Helbing model.
Keywords: crowd dynamics, biometrics, simulation.
1 Introduction
Modeling ofc rowdd ynamics [1,2,3] is of interest in particular because ofr e-
peating news ofd e a dly victims ofh u m an stampedes.A ccordingt o[ 4], four such
disasters killed more than1 20 people only in 2009. Many individuali n juries
remain unnoticed for the publick nowledge; potentially any mass meeting isa
threat, that some unexpected eventt riggers a surge oft h ec rowd.W hen the
crowdd ensity becomes too large, peoplem ay dieb y compressivea s p hyxia.B e-
fore ith a p p ens, they might wantt ol eavet h ec rowd, but they are unablet o call
forh elpa nd nobody aroundr e cognizes theirs ituation.
Our aimh e r eist o propose a s imple warnings ystem based on intelligent
devices.T he device shouldc ontinuously monitort h eE C Gsignalo f its owner
andc ompare it with his individual standard signal. Thisc ondition requires that
individuals who are fors ome reasons less sure about the action oft h eirh e a r t(age,
cardiac illnesses etc.) haveas p e cial computer program installed fore xample in
theirm obilep hones.T he function oft hisp rogram ist o monitora nd remember
the normal patterno f the heart activity.Once such a person suﬀers problems with
breathing which follow fromac r u s hingp r e s soft h ec rowd, her/hisE C Gsignal
can display deviationsf rom its everyday pattern. The remaining infrastructure
ist h a ts t andard mobilep hones shouldb ea blet o detect a call forh elp, sentf rom
the phone oft h ep e r son in need fromas h ort distance, fore xamplef romaf e w
metres.P eople in the direct neighbourhood oft h esignal sender,w arned by the
signali n theirp hones, can recognize the situation andm a k emore free space for
thisp e r son. Here wea nalyse some elements oft hiss c enario.
The idea combines biometricm e a s u r e m ents andc rowds imulation; in the last
section wer e m a r kalsoi ts psychological aspect.S imilar application ofb iometric
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 220–228, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Early Warning of Cardiac Problems in a Crowd 221
technologyw as described recently in [5], w here a vibro-tactile wearableb elts
helpﬁ ndt h edirection to exit.T he use ofm obilep hones to measure the blood
pressure [6] can also be c lassiﬁed as the irb iometrica p plication. Wea r e not
aware ofp r evious works on the use of intelligentp hones to perform a biometric
measurementa ndt o create an autonomous system ofc ommunication andh elp
in ac rowd. Our feeling is that the project can ﬁll some gap; simultaneously, it is
ak ind ofm odiﬁcation to the existingt ools.B elow wec oncentrate on two aspects
of the project.I n the following section we describe the ECG characteristics and
gives ome details of its biometricm e a s u r e m enta ndr e cognition. In the third
section we describe the s imulation oft h ec rowdd ynamics.T he last section is
devoted to discussion.
2 The ECG Signal
Al arge number of research works have recently been published on the aims of
pervasivea ndu biquitous computings ystems andt h eira p plications in ambient
intelligence-based smart environment [7]. The work in thisp a p e raims at moni-
toringa ndt r ansmittingt h eE C Gsignalo fah e a r tsick person stuck in ac rowd.
The signali sr e corded in times already set by the patienta nd the detectingu nit
can be programmed to sendac a r diac cyclet oo ther mobiles whenever needed.
Asm entioned above, the need comes when the ECG carrier requests help.W e
will show the nature oft h eE C Gwaveform itselfa ndt h en the expected changes
in the cardiac cycle when disturbances in the heart rhythm are detected some
reasonablet ime before the heart-failure takes place. Earlier diagnosed cardiovas-
cular changes can potentially rescue the patient [8].
2.1 Analysis of Recorded ECG Signal
Consider the cardiac cycle illustrated in Fig.1 as the essential part ofa n ECG
normalw aveform [9,10]. The analysis oft h eE C Giss t u died accordingt o the
following order [10]:
1. Heart rhythm:i ni ts normalw ork, the heart rh ythm is ofs inus type (a
term used in medicinet o describe the normal beating of the heart, as measured
by an electrocardiogram) characterized among other features by the presence of
P-complex before every QRS complexi n ac yclea nds imultaneously the presence
ofQ RS after everyP complex.
2.H eart impulse rate: fora d ults the normal sinus rhythm is characterized by
heart agitation in the frequencyo f 60-100 impulses per m inute.D eviations of
the rate beyondt hisr ange can be treated as abnormal case; however, the limit
frequencies shouldb et a k eni ndividually.
3. Time duration of PR, QRS andQ T parts in the cardiac cycle oft h esignal:
the rulet o follow here is that the time the interval QTi s less than half oft h e
distance between two successiveQ RT complexes.T hat is, QT shouldb e less
than1 /2 oft h eR Rinterval.
4.P complex( also called Pw ave): this is normally 0.04−0.11s in duration. Its
deviation fromt h enormalw aves h a p eor its disappearingm e ansap a t hological
case.

222 P. Gawro´ nski, K. Saeed, and K. Ku/suppresslakowski
Idealized cardiac cycle 
 T
complex   
ST  
segment 
S
QRS  
complex 
PUT
Q
R
P
PR  
interval 
QT interval 
PP interval 
P
complex 
RR interval 
Voltage 
[mV] 
time [sec] 
Fig. 1. A part of an idealized ECG waveform showing the cardiac cycle and its con-
stituent patterns (illustrated on the basis of [9] and the Polish version of [10])
5. QRS complex: the cardiac cyclep a r tt h a tr e p r e s ents the ventricular depo-
larization, which normally occurs rapidly. Its normal duration is less than0 .10s
(0.06-0.10). Ift h eQ RS complexi sp rolonged to take more than0 .1s, the con-
duction ofe lectricali mpulses is impaired within the ventricles,w hich cano ccur
with bundleb r anch blocks. Graphically, thisc a u s e sc h anges in the QRS shape
to mean there isa n abnormal case.M ore detailsc an be read in [11]. Fi gure
2 summarizes the nomenclature used to deﬁnet h ediﬀerentc omponents oft h e
QRS complex. The shapes oft h eQ RS complexi nF ig. 2a r eidealized forc onve-
nience.I n fact, the QRS complex shape changes depending on which recording
electrodes are beingu s e dand which body parts they are touching.T he shape
will also change when there isa bnormal conduction ofe lectricali mpulses within
the ventricles.T he last shape of Fig. 2 summarizes the nomenclature used to
deﬁnet h ediﬀerentc omponents oft h eQ RS complex.
6. STsegment:i ts normal duration is 0.02−0.12s.A n ydrop in the ST segment
suggests ischemic,w hile its shift abovet h ecycle-axis suggests a heart attack.
7.T complex: normalTi sa bout halft h eP-complex time.W heni t is inverted
(except fora VR), itm e ans a heart attack.
These characteristics oft h eE C Gsignal can be detected a ndc ompared with
the standard signal patterno ft h eexamined patient.I n the case ofad iﬀerence,
the signali st r ansmitted to the embedded s ystem in the mobilep hone.T he
possibles h a p e soft h eexpected deviationsc an be determined by ap hysician and
programmed to be a part oft h eHolter complimentary embedded system.
Figure 3 showst h er e corded evolution ofE C Gwaveform with a pathological
ST-segmenta T-complex. Ita lso showst h er e corded changes in Qp osition. This
is only an example ofe xtractingd isturbances fromt h eE C Gsignal andh ence
checked on-lineb y computer.

Early Warning of Cardiac Problems in a Crowd 223
Fig. 2. The nomenclature used to deﬁne the diﬀerent components of the QRS complex
             ST segment
     
Cardiac cycle Minutes after 
heart attack starts Hours later 1-2 days Several days Weeks  
after the attack 
Normal ST shifted 
- ST shifted 
- R dropping 
- Q appears to 
 be  noticeable 
- T inverted 
- Q goes lower 
- ST normal 
- T inverted 
- ST and T normal 
- Q no change 
R
Q     S 
Fig. 3. Recorded evolution of ECG waveform showing the pathological disturbances
in ST, T and Q parts (adapted from [10]). Any pathological change in any stage can
automatically be described as an abnormal disturbance.
2.2 Algorithm and Computer Implementation
The relatively short duration oft h eQ RS complexi ndicates that ventricular
depolarization normally occurs very rapidly. If, fora ny reason, it isp rolonged to
havea value greater than0 .1s, conduction is impaired within the ventricles.T his
meanst h eventricular foci( abnormal pacemaker site) becomes the pacemaker
drivingt h eventricle.S uch an ectopicf ocin early alwaysr e s ults in impulses being
conducted over slower pathways within the heart, therebyi ncreasingt h etime

224 P. Gawro´ nski, K. Saeed, and K. Ku/suppresslakowski
ford e polarization and the duration oft h eQ RS complex. Thisa nda ny oft h e
pathological changes in Figs 2 and 3 andt h eirp otential cause to a noticeable
disturbance in the heart work are eas y to detect, record, analyze andh ence
to compare with the physiological state automatically. The under construction
complimentary embedded system implies a ll these tasks .T he rec ordingu nit
isr e a dy to senda ny necessaryi nformation upon its carrier order.A nn - lead
ECG sensors are strapped to the carrier chest ors imply carried in hisp ocket to
collect the necessary data about the cardiac cycle.T here isa lso ap ossibility for
a wireless biosensor integrated with a signal transmittingu nit [13]. In any case,
the sensors collect the data ands end itf or further processing.A ccordingt o the
authorsˆa˘A´Zp roject thiss houldh a p p en toi ndicate once the crowdd ynamics and
the studied crowds ituation require.
3T h e C r o w d D y n a m i c s
The simulation isb a s e don the modelo fc rowdd ynamics, described byH elbinge t
al[ 1 ] .I nthism odel, the equation ofm otion ofap e r son i ofm a s sm is written as
mdvi
dt = mv(ri)− vi
τ +
∑
j(⁄=i)
fij +
∑
W
fiW (1)
Fig. 4. The snapshot of the crowd simulation, just after the sum of forces S has ex-
ceeded the critical value 200 N. The agent who sent the message is marked with the
crossed circle. His psychological interaction forced the others to withdraw, hence the
empty space appears around him.

Early Warning of Cardiac Problems in a Crowd 225
where the ﬁrst term on the right hands ide ist h et entative acceleration ofa
person i whoi ntends to havet h evelocity v(ri), dependent on the coordinates
ri.A sar u le, the vector v points to the exitc enter (large distance fromt h e
person to the exit)o rt o the closest point oft h eexit (small distance). Further,
τ is the characteristict ime oft his acceleration, vi ist h ea c t u alv elocityo f i-th
person, fij ist h eforce exerted on i-th person by j-th person, and fiW ist h eforce
exerted on i-th person by a wall W.T he force fij containst h r e ecomponents;
’social’ interaction which describes the te ndencyo f i and j to keep distance
between each other, andt wo physicali nteractionsb e tween theirb odies: radial
force ands lide friction. In our simulation, the two latter forces are adapted from
[1] without modiﬁcation. The social part of interaction isa lso adapted from [1].
It isg iven by
fpsych
ij = Ai exp((2R−
‖‖ri− rj
‖‖)/B)( 2)
where Ai and B are constants, R ist h em e an’ radius’o ft h evertical projection
oft h eh u m an body, and ri ist h eposition of i-th agent.T he parameters oft h e
simulation are adapted from [1]: the amplitude oft h esocial force Ai = 2000N,
the constant B which isr e s ponsiblef ort h es p a tial dependence oft h es ocial
force is 0.08m, the rad ii of age nts R =0 .3m, their masses m = 80kg, the
characteristict ime of acceleration is τ =0 .5s andt h ea b solute value oft h e
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8
S [N]
time [s]
Fig. 5. The time dependence of the sum S of modules of compressive physical forces,
acting on the agent. Once he sends a message, these forces drop to zero. For a compar-
ison, the calculation is continued also without the message sent; this variant is marked
with the thin line. The simulation is done for 200 individuals, β = 5, and the critical
value Sc = 200N.

226 P. Gawro´ nski, K. Saeed, and K. Ku/suppresslakowski
desired velocityi s 3m/s.A sr e m a r k e din [1], these values allow to reproduce
experimentali nterpersonal distances and ﬂowst h rough bottlenecks.A lso, the
same values are assumed fora ll persons, to minimize the number of parameters.
It ist h ea m plitude Ai of fpsych
ij that will be modiﬁed in our simulation. The
instant values oft h evelocities vi allow to update the positions ri as well. The
equations ofm otion are solved with the Runge-Kutta method of4 -th order.
To simulate the action oft h ealarm device,w em onitort h es u mS ofm odules
of the physical( and notp sychological) compressivef orces acting on agents.T his
sum isar ough measure of pressure inconvenience in ac rowd.T he values ofa ll
parameters are take n after [1]. Once S exceeds some predeﬁned threshold Sc
at one of the age nts j, the social force exerted by this agent on the others is
modiﬁed.I no ur calculations, the constant Aj ism ultiplied by af a c tor β.N ote
that on the contrary to physical forces, the social force does not need too bey
the Newton’st hird lawo fm otion. Thism e anst h a tp eoplea roundt h es ender try
to make more free space forh e rorh im.T hise ﬀect can be observed in Fig. 4.
Asar e s ult oft hisa c tion, the sum ofc ompressivef orces acting on the protected
person decreases.T he plot of S against time iss hown in Fig.5 .
It isd iﬃcultt o determinea n appropriate value fort h ef a c tor β oft h esocial
force.W ec an expect that neighboringp eople react as to signiﬁcantly decrease
the physical forces acting on the sender.T o evaluate β,w em a d eas e ries of
50 simulationsf or2 00 agents for β =1( n o eﬀect), β = 2, 3, 4a nd 5. The
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6
<S>t [N]
b
Fig. 6. T h et i m ea v e r a g e<S> t of the modules sum of compressive physical forces,
acting on the agent after sending the message. The average is over 50 diﬀerent initial
conditions for each value of the factor β. The values of the standard deviation are
marked with vertical segments.

Early Warning of Cardiac Problems in a Crowd 227
room was 30× 20m,w ith the exit of width of 1m in the middle oft h es horter
wall. The initial positions of the agents were selected randomly, but the initial
overlap oft h e mwas excluded.F ore a c hsimulation, the time average oft h es u m
S was calculated fromt h emoment oft h es ignal sendingt o the evacuation of
the sender.T he result iss ho w ni nF ig.6 .A s wec an see, the averaged sum S of
the forces decreases with β, as it is supposed to do. The rate oft hisc h ange also
decreases with β; above β = 4, <S> t varies only slowly and wed on ote xpect
qualitatived iﬀerences between β = 4a nd β = 8.I n many cases, S decreases to
zero after some transientt ime not longer than0 .3s, and it is only thist r ansient
that gives a contribution to <S> t.W e deduce that β ofa value close to5 . 0
reﬂects reasonably the consequences oft h esignal sendingf ort h ec h ange oft h e
social force.
4 Discussion
The project designed in thisp a p e rcombines the b iometricm e a s u r e m enta nd
data analysis with the simulation oft h ec rowdd ynamics.T hird advantage ist h e
socio-psychological component.N amely, the person who gets the ca ll forh elp
is nota nonymous.T hisp e r son recognizes that the information in the messages
recorded at each phone isr e gistered andc an be retrieved.T hisc r e a t e san eﬃcient
motivation to respond.I ft his is notp ossible, the receiver can at least contact the
emergency services andt r ansmit the message.T his lack ofa nonimity prevents
the so-called bystander eﬀect [12]w hen peopled on ot oﬀer theirh elp in the
presence of other peoplea st h ey hope that s omebody else will doi t. On the
other hand, t h es a m econsciousness ofb eing identiﬁed shouldp r eventa n action
oft hieves orr obbers.T he call forh elps entb y the mobilep hone oft h eill person
couldc ontain her orh is name andc ontact phone number, along with the label
’cardiac problem’. The advantage to call an unknown but neigboringp e r son and
notad istantp hysiciani s that thelocation oft h es ender can be ﬁxed immediately.
Concluding,w ep ropose a simples ystem tow arn about cardiac problems of
ag iven person. The warning ist r ansmitted automatically to mobilep hones of
peoplea roundt h es ender.A n essential part oft h esystem ist h esoftware which
isa blet o distinguish the normal andt h ea bnormal action oft h eowner’sh e a r t.
The system can be applied alsoi n car traﬃc on roads.
Acknowledgements.The researchisp a r tially supported within the FP7p roject
SOCIONICAL, No. 231288.
References
1. Helbing, D., Farkas, I., Vicsek, T.: Simulating dynamical features of escape panic.
Nature 407, 487–490 (2000)
2. Isobe, M., Helbing, D., Nagatani, T.: Experiment, theory and simulation of the
evacuation of a room without visibility. Phys. Rev. E 69, 66132 (2004)

228 P. Gawro´ nski, K. Saeed, and K. Ku/suppresslakowski
3. Helbing, D., Buzna, L., Johansson, A., Werner, T.: Self-organized pedestrian crowd
dynamics: Experiments, simulations, and design solutions. Transportation Sci-
ence 39, 1–24 (2005)
4. Evidence of some crowd related disasters since (1902),
http://www.crowddynamics.co.uk
5. Ferscha, A., Zia, K.: LifeBelt: silent directional guidance for crowd evacuation. In:
Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Wearable Computers (ISWC
2009), pp.19-26. IEEE Computer Society Press,Washington (2009)
6. Webpage of the patent application,
http://www.faqs.org/patents/app/20080242348
7. Stasko, J., Doo, M., Dorn, B., Plaue, C.: Explorations and experiences with ambient
information systems. In: PERVASIVE 2007, pp. 36–41 (2007)
8. Panidis, I.P., Morganroth, J.: Sudden death in hospitalized patients: cardiac
rhythm disturbances detected by ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring.
Journal of the American College of Cardiology 2, 798–805 (1983)
9. Trahanias, P., Skordalakis, E.: Syntactic pattern recognition of the ECG. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 12, 648–657 (1990)
10. Lilly, L.S.: Pathophysiology of heart disease. In: A collaborative project of medical
students and Faculty, Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Boston (2007)
11. Klabunde, R.E .: Cardiovascular Physiology Concepts. Lippincott, Williams and
Wilkins, Philadelphia (2005)
12. Aronson, E., Wilson, T.D., Akert, R.M.: Social Psychology. Pearson Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River (2006)
13. Lo, B., Thiemjarus, S., King, R., Yang, G.Z.: Body sensor network - a wireless
sensor platform for pervasive healthcare monitoring. In: Gellersen, H.-W., Want,
R., Schmidt, A. (eds.) PERVASIVE 2005. LNCS, vol. 3468, pp. 77–80. Springer,
Heidelberg (2005)

Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios
Wieslawa Sikora and Janusz Malinowski
Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH - University of Science
and Technology, Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krakow, Poland
Abstract. The symmetry analysis method based on the theory of group
representations is used for description of complex systems and their be-
havior in this work. The ﬁrst trial of using the symmetry analysis in
modeling of behavior of complex social system is presented. The evacua-
tion of large building scenarios are discussed as transition from chaotic to
ordered states, described as movements of individuals according to ﬁelds
of displacements, calculated correspondingly to given scenario. The sym-
metry of the evacuation space is taken into account in calculation of dis-
placements ﬁeld - the displacements related to every point of this space
are presented in the coordinate frame in the best way adapted to given
symmetry space group, which is the set of basic vectors of irreducible rep-
resentation of given symmetry group.. The results obtained with using the
symmetry consideration are compared with corresponding results calcu-
lated under assumption of shortest way to exits (Voronoi assumption).
Keywords: social systems, evacuation scenario, symmetry analysis
method.
1 Introduction
In the presented work, ac omplex behaviour ofs ystems ofm any individual ele-
ments organized by diﬀerentt ype ofc onnectionsa nd interactions isc oncerned.
An example ofs u c hcomplex systems (CS-s)i n vestigated by physicists isas olid
state, built ofah u g enumber ofa toms.A special type of it isac r ystal, where
atoms ﬁll discrete space characterized by as t rictly deﬁned symmetry, described
byo ne of2 30 crystallographics p a c eg roups. Quite a diﬀerente xample ofac om-
plex system investigated by sociologists isas ocialn etwork, built ofah u g enum-
ber ofp eople (regarded as individualo bjects). Both types ofs ystems require a
big number of parameters for description oft h eirp roperties andb e h aviour under
an action ofe xternal factors. One of importants u bjects of interest fors cientists
isap r e diction of new states ofC S-s,w hen ani n itial state oft h esystem isk nown,
andad e s c ription of these states by am inimaln umber ofr elevant parameters.I t
isk nown, that the presentation ofm odel structures in the frame ofc oordinate
axisc hoseni n the best matchingt o the symmetryo f the problem provides the
simplest (requiringt h elowest number of independent parameters) description of
the system properties.W ep ostulate that the time evolution oft h esystem - also
as ocial system - takes place in as t rictly given space,w ith well-known symmetry
properties.T he conditions oft h es p a c esymmetryi mpose strongr e s t rictions on
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 229–241, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

230 W. Sikora and J. Malinowski
the evolution oft h esystems.N ota ll types ofb e h aviour are allowed.T he sym-
metry properties shouldb et a k eni nto account when creatingm odelst o extract
these possibilities ofs ystem evolutions,w hich are permitted by symmetryo ft h e
space andf orc hoosingt h eb e s tcoordinate axisf ort h eir description, related to
the symmetryo ft h esystem.T he symmetry analysism e t hod (SAM) based on
the theoryo fg roup representationsg ives the opportunity to realize thist a s k.
As SAM isg eneral, and includes the type of objects localized in the given space
only by theirt r ansformation properties under the action ofs ymmetryo perations,
here wec h e c kif it isp ossiblet o use SAM to predict a time evolution ofas ocial
system.T he ﬁrst attemptism a d eby modelinga n evacuation ofah igh and large
oﬃce building.I n thism odel the transformation oft h esocial system occurs in
the building,w hich iss ymmetrical ands p an the space ,w here the evolution of
behaviour oft h esystem takes place.T he symmetryo fa llowed space changes as
the result ofe m e r g ency ands ome transformationsd isappear as the s ymmetry
elements.W hen the resultings ymmetry group of the structure occurs to be a
subgroup oft h einitialo ne,S A Mmay be applied to the considered problem.A t
the initial phase the behavior of individuals isd isordered because ofs ome risk
situation. The state oft hiss ystem in the ordered phase,w hich should refer to
a well-organized evacuation, is described by displacements ofa ll individuals in
strictly given directions with strictly given speeds.T he transition may be in-
duced byi ntroducingau s e f ul globali nformation, transmitted fore xampleb y
speakers, billboards anda nother intelligentd evices,w hich tell the people,w hat
they havet o do. Such information playst h erole ofa n external, orderingﬁ eld.
Diﬀerentm odelsa r eworked out ford iﬀerent irreducibler e p r e s entations oft h e
symmetry group oft h einitial phase. Results are presented with a small num-
ber of parameters because the d irectionsa nd speeds of individualsa r es t rictly
related in each case.T he algorithm is implemented in the form ofac omputer
simulation, where the time ofe vacuation in diﬀerentm odels is investigated as
dependent on the densityo f individuals in the evacuation space andt h eavarage
force acting on one individual duringt h etime ofe vacuation is determined as a
function oft h enumber ofe vacuated individuals.T he symmetryo ft h eallowed
space changes as the result ofe m e r g ency. The results are compared with similar
results obtained without symmetry restrictions.
2 The Elements of the Symmetry Analysis Method
The symmetry group ofs ome object isd e ﬁned as some special set oft r ansforma-
tions which leavet his object unchanged.A st h eelements ofs p a c eg roups appear
translations, mirrorp lanes,i n version ands ome special rotationsa roundt h eaxis,
as gooda sa ll combinations oft h e m.T ranslational symmetry gives the possibil-
ity to choose a small block named an elementary cell. A multiple repetition of
thisb lock reconstructs the wholes ystem.I n this way, the description oft h esys-
tem is reduced to a description ofe lementary cell. Such procedure reduces the
number of parameters needed to describe the system, but this number may be
further decreased by usingf ull symmetry restrictions,n ot only the translational

Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios 231
one.P roperties ofag iven system in the mathematicall anguage are expressed
as functionsd e ﬁned on the allowed space.I n crystals, they may be fore xam-
plet h em a gneticm oments localized on given positions,o rp robabilities ofs ites
occupations.T he transformation properties ofs u c hf unctionsa r egiven by the
matrix representations ofa llowed space symmetry group.I n textbooks, the rep-
resentations ofd iﬀerentg roups (also crystallographic 32p ointg roups and2 30
space groups) are calculated and listed.
Theoryo fg roup representationsh a db e en applied to simplify the description
ofm a ny-body, complex physical systems ma ny y ears ag o. E.W i gner[12],
G.J.Lubarski[13] and A.P.Cracknell[14]i ntroduced sets ofb a sic vectors of irre-
ducibler e p r e s entations ofm olecular symmetry groups as“symmetricc oordinates”
in the calculations ofm olecular vibrations.L ubarski discussed also the role of
irreducibler e p r e s entations ofc rystal symmetry group in crystallographics e cond-
order phase transitions.T he symmetry analysism e t hod (SAM) based on the the-
oryo fg roups andr e p r e s entations was at ﬁrst introduced by E.F. Bertaut in the
description ofm a gnetic ordering in crystals.H e obtained the symmetry-adapted
orderingm odes, derived from the representation analysisb y the calculation of
basic vectors of irreducibler e p r e s entations.L ater that line ofa nalysish a sb e en
developed by many other theoreticians,l ike Izyumov [1] and others.
In solid phase physics the superstructure as theordering ofs ome ”property”of
the initial crystal structure mayo ccur as the result of a phase transition under
the action of temperature, magneticﬁ eld orp r e s s u r e. Each of the properties of
the crystal that is localized on atoms ites may be described by a Wannier function
S deﬁned on some set ofe q uivalentp ositions.I tm ay be a function ofs c alar type
- describingf ore xamplec h ange ofp robabilityo fs ites occupation, a vector-polar
type describingf ore xampled isplacements ofa toms frome q uilibrium positions,
an axial-type describingf ore xample ordering ofm a gneticm oments,o rat e nsor
type-describingf ore xample ordering of quadrupolem oments.T he presentation
oft hisf unction in the usually used frame ofc oordinates related to the crystallo-
graphics ystem takes advantage oft r anslation symmetryo n l y .Other symmetry
relationsa r e lost in this description anda sac onsequence the descr iption of
many crystal properties is nota ss implea sp ossible.F romt h er ules oft h et h eory
ofg roup representations itf ollows, that any function deﬁned on the space with
given symmetry group may be presented as a linear combination ofb a sis vectors
of irreducibler e p r e s entations (BV-s) Ψ oft hisg roup:
S =
∑
l,ν,λ
ckl,ν
λ Ψkl,ν
λ (1)
(l -n umber of k vectors describingt h et r anslational symmetryo f S, ν -n umber
of IR’s, λ -n umber ofd imensions of ν’s IR).
FromE q u a tion (1) follows, that the function S may be treated as some vector
in the functional space, the BV-s Ψ play the same r ole in the presentation of
function S, as axis ofc oordinate system, andc oeﬃcients ckl, as components of
it.W hen ani rreducibler e p r e s entation (IR)i st a k eni nto accountt h edimension
oft hisf unctional space invariantu nder all group transformations ist h es m allest

232 W. Sikora and J. Malinowski
one.I t leads to the smallest number of ckl parameters,w hich representt h e
function S in the frame of BV-s Ψ. Each choice of these free parameters ckl
uniquely determines one oft h ep ossiblem odels of new structure that may be
realized after the phase transition.
The presentation ofm odel structures in the frame ofb a sic vectors of irre-
ducibler e p r e s entations oft h einitial symmetry group (BV) S instead oft h a tin
the frame ofc rystallographics ystem (x, y, z), ist h eb e s tm a t c hingt o the sym-
metryo f the problem and itp rovides the simplest (requiringt h elowest number
of independent parameters) form of the structure description.
The form of the basis vectors andt h einformation which representation takes
part in the phase transition under consideration are directly given by theoryo f
groups andr e p r e s entations.I t is importantt on ote that the basis vectors havet h e
same translational properties as theBloch functions.T herefore, the basis vectors
may be deﬁned on positions in given elementary cell oft h ec rystal as well as in
the elementary cell translated by a lattice vector t,w hich just corresponds to a
multiplication by eikt.N ota ll possible ckl are allowed, because the parameters
shouldb es elected in such way that the resultingp roperties related to all atoms
haver e alv alues.T hisc ondition inﬂuences the set ofe q u a tions which ckl have
to satisfy anda sar e s ultt h enumber of independent free parameters is reduced
ands t rictly determined.A fter such operation the ﬁnal model containsc learly
deﬁned minimum number of free parameters andp r e s ents strictly deﬁned rela-
tionsb e tween quantities localized on diﬀerentc rystal sites which describe the
considered property. The choice ofr e p r e s entation tau andt h ec oeﬃcients ckl
uniquely determines the symmetryo ft h enew, ordered structure,i ndependently
on the kind of the property takeni nto account.T he type of phase transition and
the property under consideration is included in the form ofb a sis vectors.I n the
frame of SAM also ad iscussion isp ossible oft h econnectionsb e tween diﬀerent
types oft r ansformations.
To execute the mentioned tasks, the computer program MODY based on the
representations ofs ymmetry space groups [2][6], anda nother associated pro-
grams -S P L I T ,Tensor-vis,T etra vis, had been elaborated.T hey enablet o ﬁnd
all possibilities of new scalar,v ectora ndt ensort ype structure pr operties al-
lowed by the initial symmetryo f the structure .I n the case ofc rystals, under
an assumption that the group-subgroup relation isp r e s e rved in the transforma-
tion procedure,( what means, that the structure oft h esystem is notd r a s tically
changed), the symmetry analysism e t hod (SAM) [1] gives ano pportunity to
propose the set ofa ll possiblet ypes ofﬁ nal structures.B ecause the space has
limitations (must fulﬁll the symmetry conditions)n ota ll evolutions in ita r e
able.S A Mexplicitly indicates which evolutions are permitted.T hese new types
of orderings are described by the number of free parameters as small as possible.
SAM had been applied successfully in the investigations of phase transitions
in crystals. Examples of published results may be foundf orad iscussion ofs t r u c-
tural phase transitions (both displacements and order-disorder types)[7], [8], or-
derings ofm a gneticm oments [9], quadrupols [10], anda lsoo rderings ofm olecules
andc lusters [11].

Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios 233
3 Symmetry Analysis in Description of Social Systems
A description ofb e h avior ofs ocial systems depending on many diﬀerentf a c tors
isf a rf romb e ings imple.A construction ofm odels appr oximatingt h eirr e al
behavior,w ith signiﬁcantr e s t riction of number of used parameters can be useful
here.I nthe casewhen an evolution ofc omplex social systems appearsin as t rictly
given space,w ith known symmetry, it seems possiblet o make use oft h em e t hods
developed fort h e investigations oft r ansformations in solid states ,w here the
application ofs ymmetry restrictionss impliﬁes thedescription andp e r mits for
predictions ofs ystem evolution. Inthis work wec h e c k,i f it isp ossiblet o use SAM
presented in the previous chapter to predict the evolution oft h esocial system
and if itg ives some new results.T he ﬁrst attempt ism a d eform odelingt h e
evacuation ofah igh and large oﬃce building.I n thism odel the transformation
ofs ocial system takes place in the building,w hich iss ymmetrical ands p an the
space fort hiss ystem.I norder to application of SAM the assumptionsc oncerning
evacuation modelsh a db e en made as given below:
1. A longa ndh igh buildingc onsisting of identical fractions repeated in three
perpendicular directionsp r e s ents the space,w here the behaviour of our social
system is investigated.T he architecture of the buildingp r e s ented at Fig.1 allows
to approximate its symmetry by Pmm2s p a c eg roup (the symbol oft h eg roup
isu s e din agreement with InternationalT ables forC rystallography).
2. Onef r a c tion of the bu ilding with existinge xits isp r e s ented at Fig. 2.
This “elementary cell” of initial allowed space isﬁ lled by statistically distributed
individuals over (x, y,0) points oft h eﬂoor.B ecause the probabilityo f occupation
ofe a c hsite at the ﬂoor ist h es a m e, the scalar function describingd istribution
of individualss a tisﬁes the initial symmetry assumed as Pmm2.
3. Some accidenta p p e a r s,w hich leads to the movement of individuals.I n pre-
sented analysist h evectorﬁ eld of individual displacements ist a k eni nto account
as a function S0 deﬁned on given space and describingt h e”superstructure”. As
the initial state the chaoticm ovement is assumed,w hat means that the proba-
bilityo fd isplacements ofe a c hof individuals in each direction ist h es a m e.T he
speeds related to each ofp oints are a lso assumed to be equal. It leads to the
Fig. 1. Some buildings are made of many similar “cells”

234 W. Sikora and J. Malinowski
Fig. 2. “Elementary cell” in large building
symmetryo f ”superstructure”,the same as the symmetryo ft h es p a c eonly. This
state describes the situation without included interactions on the system,w hen
no information spread appears.
4.A sa new state is attained in a phase transition under the action ofe xternal
information sources, realizingt h eevacuation (speakers, billboards anda nother
intelligentd evices), ano rdered movement is regarded.T he function S presenting
the ordered superstructure describes the newv ectorﬁ eld,w here displacements
ofa ll individualsa r eﬁxed in strictly given directions.T he speeds of individuals
in thiss c enario are, as at the beginning, equal and no internali nteractionsa r e
takeni nto account.T he symmetryo f new superstructure may be the same as the
symmetryo ft h einitial phase, but may also be diﬀerent.S A Mgives all possible
ordered displacements ﬁelds,w hich are permitted by the symmetryo ft h einitial
phase.I n this work we assume, that the best evacuation scenario shouldr e alize
the displacements ﬁeld,w here the symmetryi ss t rictly t h es a m ea st h esymmetry
oft h es p a c eallowed after the acc ident.S cenarios ofd iﬀerenta c cidents realize
diﬀerents ituations ofb roken symmetry. In this work, two simples c enarios with
the same situation in each ”elementary cell” are discussed:
a) the information indicates, that all exits are allowed, the symmetryo ft h e
space does notc h ange,
b) the information indicates, that some oft h eexits are forbidden, the sym-
metryo ft h eallowed space is lower than the symmetryo ft h einitialo nea ndt his
symmetryi sk nown.
The symmetry analysis ofp ossibles ystem transformationsf or Pmm2s p a c e
group, and k =( 0, 0, 0) (itm e ans, that the situation in each cell ist h es a m e), the
4iW yckofp ositions (r1n =( xn,y n, 0)) have in the case ofp olar vectorf unctions
four IR-sa llowed forr e alization ofd isplacement phase tra nsition . T hey are:
tau1, tau2, tau3 and tau4 (the labeling of IR-s isg iven accordingt oK o valev
Tables of IR-s [3]). Each oft h e mis one-dimensional ande a c hoft h e misa llowed
three times,w hat meanst h a tfore a c hr e p r e s entation three diﬀerentf unctions
may be deﬁned as IRb a sis vectors.B ecause these functionsa r eone-dimensional
andr e al, they directly (with accuracy too nem ultiplication factorf ore a c hof
them) describe the displacements related to given set ofp oints.A sm ay be seen
fromt h eTable 1 the displacements ofp ositionsb elongingt oo nes e tofe q uivalent
positionsa r es t rongly correlated.B ecause only the displacements in the xy plane
are takeni nto account in the models,o n l yversions I and II shouldb e included to
the calculations ofd isplacements by using the Equation 1 (all parameters Ci are
zero). The relationsb e tween symmetry equivalentp ositions listed in the Table
1 don otd e p end on the chosen quantities of x and y.

Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios 235
As iss hown inthe Table 1, the representation tau1 describes the displacements
distribution with the same symmetry as in the initial phase, soi tm ay be applied
to construct the model correspondingt o the assumption as in Fig. 4.T he last
three representationsf ollow to the displacements distribution, where the sym-
metryi s lower than Pmm2g roup oft h einitial phase.T heyl ead to evacuation
scenariosc orrespondingt o the assumption as in Fig.5 ,w ith two forbidden exits.
(Each representation isr elated to diﬀerentc hoice off orbidden exits, realizing
the correspondings ymmetry.) When the translational symmetryo ft h eallowed
space after the acc ident isb roken- the new, larger ”elementary cell” ist o be
takeni nto account, the IR-sr elated ton o n zero k-vectors lead to the models
ofd isplacements ﬁelds adjusted to the new symmetry. When the allowed space
isc ompletely asymmetric (there is no symmetry), no restrictionsf ollow ann o
predictions indicated byS A Misp ossible.
Table 1. Displacements vectors calculated for Pmm2 space group
Representation
and destination
group
 Version
Displacements vectors (x, y,z) at positions in the elemen-
tary cell, which form the basic vector function
Free
parameter
Pos. 4i
1:(x,y,0)
 2:(1-x,1-
y,0)
3:(1-
x,y,0)
4:(x,1-
y,0)
tau1 destination
group Pmm2
I
 A1
 (1,0,0)
 (-1,0,0)
 (-1,0,0)
 (1,0,0)
II
 B1
 (0,1,0)
 (0,-1,0)
 (0,1,0)
 (0,-1,0)
III
 C1
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,1)
tau2 destination
group P112
I
 A2
 (1,0,0)
 (-1,0,0)
 (1,0,0)
 (-1,0,0)
II
 B2
 (0,1,0)
 (0,-1,0)
 (0,-1,0)
 (0,1,0)
III
 C2
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,-1)
 (0,0,-1)
tau3 destination
group Pm11
I
 A3
 (1,0,0)
 (1,0,0)
 (-1,0,0)
 (-1,0,0)
II
 B3
 (0,1,0)
 (0,1,0)
 (0,1,0)
 (0,1,0)
III
 C3
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,-1)
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,-1)
tau4 destination
group P1m1
I
 A4
 (1,0,0)
 (1,0,0)
 (1,0,0)
 (1,0,0)
II
 B4
 (0,1,0)
 (0,1,0)
 (0,-1,0)
 (0,-1,0)
III
 C4
 (0,0,1)
 (0,0,-1)
 (0,0,-1)
 (0,0,1)
Asa n example the ﬁelds ofd isplacements followingf rom SAM gettingf or tau1
and tau2 representationsa r es hown correspondingly at the Fig.3 and Fig.5 .F or
the comparison the ﬁelds ofd isplacements calculated forb oth situationsu nder
the assumption oft h e”shortest way to exit”( V oronoi criterion) are presented at
the Fig.3 and Fig. 4.
Asm ay be seen tau1 presents the full agreement with Voronoi, whereas tau2
and Voronoi lead to diﬀerentd isplacementd istributions.T he calculations of
displacements ﬁelds discussed above, accordingt ow hich the trajectories of in-
dividualsm ovements duringt h eevacuation ofs ymmetrics p a c eof the building
may be drawn, had been presented at the SSPCM conference in Myczkowce [4].

236 W. Sikora and J. Malinowski
4 Simulation Results
In our simulation approach a few forces can aﬀect everyi ndividual. In the sim-
plest case weg e tonly onef orce, the onet h a t”shows” to ani ndividual her/his
way to a nearest exit (”force ﬁeld”i ss t rictly related to the ”ﬁeld ofd isplace-
ment” mentioned above). Nexta nd veryi mportant ist h eforce that individuals
”feel” when they are too close to each other.T hisf orce isc onnected to physical
aspects of individuals.T hey all haveb odies ofs ome sizes.I tm e ans wec annot
put two diﬀerent individuals in the same place.T he nextf orce represents some
psychological aspects of our individuals.I ft h ey gote nough space aroundt h ey
don’t wantt o stay too close to each other.A t current stage wed on’tt a k eany
other forces into consideration. However there are a lot of other possibilities
which will be taken account in our future work.S ome sociological relationsc an
be considered as such forces.F ore xample -i f weh ave in the roomam other with
ac hildt h eyw ish to stay together.I n such case ”force ﬁeld” that show the way
to the exits can be ignored by thist wo (mother andc hild). Of course, the forces
that came from other individualsc an’tb e ignored.T he mother andh e rc hild
still can be separated by am ovingc rowd.V eryi mportantq u e s tion is - how to
calculate this ”force ﬁeld”that showst h eway to exits.F irst method was already
mentioned:w ec an use ”Voronoi criterion”. Inthism odelw ec onstruct our ﬁelds
ofd isplacements in such a way, that everyonet a k e ss hortest path to the exit.
In reall ife such ﬁelds ofd isplacements can be achieved by arrows on the ﬂoor,
orb yi nformation that isg iven to peopleb y mobiled evices.I st h es hortest way
always better?W hat if wet a k eanother evacuation strategy? What ift hisf orce
ﬁeld looks diﬀerent?I no ur approach wec h ange thisﬁ eldt o another one - a
littlem ore complicated.T hisﬁ eld isc alculated usingg roup theory mentioned
at the beginning oft hisa r ticle. Comparison between this approach and normal
”Voronoi” approach is described below.
The ﬁelds ofd isplacements calculated with usingt h esymmetry considerations
andt h eVoronoi assumption were implemented in the computer simulations.I n
the simulation oft h ee vacuation procedure the represe ntation tau1 -w ithout
broken symmetry- and tau2 with the s ymmetry broken to P112g roup are
takeni nto account.A st h es t a r tingp ointf ors imulation accordingt o both IR-s
results the displacements at each of r1n points are choseni n the direction to
the nearest exit.T he last three p ositionsb elongingt o the set of Wyckoﬀ are
strictly correlated with the ﬁrst one, accordingt o the given representation. This
treatmentg ives thevectorﬁ eld,w here at each pointt h epolar vectorr e p r e s enting
the displacement isd e ﬁned. Examples ofr e s ultingd istribution ofd isplacements
are sho w ni nF ig.3 (tau1) and Fig.4 (tau2). Forc omparison the corresponding
displacements distributions obtained in the Voronoi model, realizingt h es hortest
way to exitc riterion are quoted in the ﬁgure as partsoft h eallowed space.I nF ig.3
the distribution correspondingt o tau1 representation isp r e s ented by arrows.T he
wholes p a c eavailable isd ivided into four subspaces,w here the points fulﬁll the
Voronoi criterion. Asm ay be seen, at each pointt h edisplacements leadingb y
the tau1 representation andt h e Voronoi criterion are the same .I nF i g.4t h e
distribution correspondingt o tau2 isp r e s ented by arrows.T he displacement

Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios 237
Fig. 3. Force ﬁeld calculated for 4 exits - tau1 representation and voronoi are equal
Fig. 4. Force ﬁeld calculated for 2 exits - tau2 representation
ﬁeldc alculated accordingt oV oronoi isp r e s ented in Fig.5. Asm ay be see n,
the distributions tau2 and Voronoi don ot agree.B oth models (symmetrica nd
Voronoi) are used in the simulation procedure.F ore a c hof them the t ime of
evacuation anda verage force acting on one individual duringe vacuation are
calculated as dependent on the number of individuals in the evacuated space.
Fora ll simulationst h eHelbingm odel[ 5 ]had been used.T hism odeli sb a s e don
physics ands ocio-psychical forces in order to describe the human crowdb e h avior
in as ituation ofp anic.I t uses the particles ystem where each particleh a sgot
a preferred desired velocity, in a certain direction. These directionsd iﬀer in the
Voronoi model andt h etau2 model. Att hisp oint we assume that the maximum
speed ofm ovement is identical fora ll particles.T he comparison ofr e s ulting
functionsg ives the possibility to estimate theirq u ality.
The movement of individuals (at ”0”time statistically distributed with some
assumed density) isr e alized by steps, tow hich given time units are related,i n
directionsa c cordingt o displacementﬁ eldc orrespondingt o ag iveni rreducible
representation. The time after which all individuals went out (the time ofe vac-
uation) ism e a s u r e da saf unction of the densityo f individuals.F ore a c hd ensity,
300 cases ofe vacuation are simulated andt h eaverage time ofe vacuation isc al-
culated.T he same procedure as fors ymmetrical case isa p plied fort h eVoronoi
model. The results ofb oth methods are presented in the plotg iveni nF ig.6. In
thisp lott h eindividual densityi sr e p r e s ented by the initialn umber of individuals
in the cell space.

238 W. Sikora and J. Malinowski
Fig. 5. Force ﬁeld calculated for 2 exits - voronoi. We can see slight diﬀerence when
compared to tau1.
Fig. 6. Direct comparison of evacuation time between voronoi and tau1
The evolution ofe vacuation accordingt oV oronoi and tau2 models isp r e s ented
at Fig.7.T he example of8 0 peoplee vacuation iss hown. Asm ay be seeni nF ig.6,
fors u c hd ensity the evacuation time obtained within the two models (tau2 and
Voronoi) ist h es a m e.A tt h es t a r tboth modelsg ott h es a m esituation - people
randomly distributed in the hall. Figures ”a”,” b”, ”c” show the situation in
the hall correspondingly after 250, 500 and7 50 simulation steps.F igures on the
right side presentt h esituations received by using ”Voronoi”model( everyoneg o
straight to exit),whereas the left ones show the situations received by usingt h e
”tau2” model.
In Fig.8 wec an see a comparison oft h eaverage force acting on one individual
duringe vacuation. The ﬁgure is obtained as follows: fore a c hnumber ofp eople,
300 virtual” l obbys”w as ﬁlled with randomly distributed humansa ndt h en the
simulation ofe vacuation was made.F ore a c hoft hise vacuation simulation the
average force acting on ani ndividual humanw as calculated anda veraged over
all 300 evacuations.
We must remember that the s ymmetryi s only the start ingp ointf ort h e
simulation. Calculating of ”ﬁelds ofd isplacements”i s nott h eonly wayw ec an

Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios 239
Fig. 7. Evacuation steps when tau1 model and voronoi model are used
Fig. 8. Comparison of average force acting on one individual during evacuation when
voronoi and tau1 model are used
use the s ymmetry concept in our simulation. A v eryi nterestingt hing in our
approach ist h a twec an take only small ”cells”i nto consideration andc an draw
some ge neral conclusionse ven about much m ore c omplicated s ystems based
on that.
5 Conclusions
In this work it iss hown that the symmetry approach can be useful toi n vestigate
the time evolution ofac omplex social system.I n particular,S A Mdeveloped in

240 W. Sikora and J. Malinowski
solid state physics isag e neral methodt h a tm ay be used to construct models of
evacuation. Thism e t hodg ives ano pportunity to adjust the modelo fd isplace-
ments ﬁelda ndc orresponding lines ofm ovements of individualst o each type
ofa c cidents appearing in as ymmetrics p a c e.I t leads to a description oft h e
models with the number of parameters smaller thani no ther methods, though
its implementation in simulation procedure is nott rivial.
The symmetry methodg ives the possibility to develops c enarios in the future.
Besides oft h evectord isplacementﬁ eld wec an add a ”scalar” ﬁeldt h a taﬀects
the speed of individuals in motion. Wec ani ncorporate in our approach diﬀerent
properties of individuals localized on positions in the cell described by af unction
ofs c alar,v ector ort ensort ype, and investigate relationsb e tween them.T his
symmetry results can be introduced to the simulation procedure.A lsow ea r e
ablet oi nclude the interactionsb e tween some groups of individuals (mother-
child’s, boss-subordinate, etc.) andt oi nclude in this way the possibilityo fs ome
clusters ofd iﬀerents izes.
Asm ay be seen fromt h eplots foras m all number of individualst h eevac-
uation accordingt oV oronoi model( alongs hortest way to exits) requires the
shortest time, than the evacuation accordingt o model given by the SAM. For
higher densityo f individualst h etime ofe vacuation predicted by both models is
similar.F ors u c hd ensities the observation ofe volution ofe vacuation duringt h e
simulation procedure seems toi ndicate intol ess number ofc ollisions,w heni ndi-
vidualsa r egoingt o exits accordingt o the displacements ﬁeldp r e dicted by using
the symmetry conditions.T hisf a c tisc onﬁrmed in the simulation by measuring
the average force acting on individuals, appearing in evacuationsa c cordingt o
both models.T hese two parameters (number ofc ollisionsa nda verage force) are
strongly related and seem to characterize similar properties oft h emodels.A s
may be seen from Fig. 8t h eaverage force isb igger and increases with the density
of individualsm ore quickly in the straight-line Voronoi model thani n the sym-
metric tau2 model. This indicates that the e vacuation accordingt o the model
proposed with usingt h esymmetry analysism ay be more safe andc omfortable
than the modelw here the trajectories are straight lines.
Acknowledgement. This work isp a r tially supported by EU program SO-
CIONICAL (FP7 No 231288).
References
1. Izyumov, Y.A., Syromyatnikov, V.N.: Phase Transitions and Crystal Symmetry,
ch. 2. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (1990)
2. Sikora, W., et al.: J. Appl. Cryst. 37, 1015–1019 (2004)
3. Kovalev, O.V.: Representations of the Crystallographic Space Groups. In: Stokes,
H.T., Hatch, D.M. (eds.). Gordon & Breach, London (1993)
4. Sikora, W., Malinowski, J.: Symmetry analysis in parametrization of complex sys-
tems. In: The Tenth International School on Theoretical Physics, SSPCM 2009,
Myczkowce, Poland (2009)
5. Helbing, D., et al.: Simulating dynamical features of escape panic. Nature 407, 487
(2000)

Symmetry Approach to Evacuation Scenarios 241
6. http://novell.ftj.agh.edu.pl/~sikora/mody.htm
7. Sikora, W., Malinowski, J., Figiel, H.: J. Alloys Compd., 446–447, 423-428 (2007),
doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2006.12.092
8. Sikora, W., Kuna, A.: Acta Physica Polonica A 113, 1211–1224 (2008)
9. Fischer, P., Pomjakushin, V., Keller, L., Daoud-Aladine, A., Sikora, W., Domman,
A., Hulliger, F.: Phys. Rev. B 72, 134–413 (2005)
10. Sikora, W., Pytlik, L., Bialas, F., Malinowski, J.: J. Alloys Compd. 442, 61–69
(2007), doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2006.08.34
11. Sikora, W., Malinowski, J., Kuna, A., Pytlik, L.: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 1004 012023 (2008), doi:10.1088/1742-6596/104/012023
12. Wigner, E.P.: Group Theory and its Application to the Quantum Mechanics of
Atomic Spectra. Academic Press, New York (1959)
13. Lubarski, G.J.: Teoria grup i jej zastosowania w ﬁzyce. PWN, Warszawa (1961)
14. Cracknell, A.P.: Applied Group Theory. Pergamon Press, Oxford (1968)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 242–251, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model  
for Driver Behavior 
Christian Maag, Christian Mark, and Hans-Peter Krüger 
Universität Würzburg, Psychologisches Institut III, Röntgenring 11,  
97070 Würzburg, Germany 
{maag,mark,krueger}@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de 
http://www.izvw.de 
Abstract. Aggressive driving has become a very common phenomenon. It 
highlights the importance of emotional states as an influencing factor for driv-
ing style and behavior. Advanced driver assistance systems are implemented in 
the car with the objective to enhance road safety and to assist the driver. In  
order to develop these systems according to the users’ needs and to assess the 
potential effects, the driving behavior of drivers (with and without these new 
technologies) must be known. This modeling of drivers’ behavior has to take 
into account cognitive and emotional mechanisms, in order to be as realistic as 
possible. The paper presents a cognitive-emotional driver model focusing on 
anger and reports evidence for its valid ity. This driver model can be imple-
mented in microscopic, agent-based traffic models and expands the output and 
scope of traffic modeling and analysis on cognitive and emotional variables. 
Keywords: driving behavior, driving simulation, aggressive driving, driver 
state, driver emotion. 
1   Introduction 
Conflicts and aggressive episodes between drivers in road traffic are very common [1] 
and receive increasing awareness by road users and the general public. In the view of 
most people the traffic climate has become more stressful and more aggressive within 
the last years.  
The phenomenon of aggressive driving is also reflected by scientific articles relat-
ing to that topic. Studies on aggressive driving show that the state of drivers changes 
the way how people drive and interact with other road users [2] [3] [4]. Moreover, it 
changes driving conditions on the system level (traffic climate). Therefore, in traffic 
psychology emotional driver state is known as an important factor influencing driving 
behavior (individual level), interactions on the road (dyadic level), and resulting traf-
fic characteristics (system level). 
The analysis of complexity issues in road traffic is part of the FP7 funded project 
SOCIONICAL that develops complexity science modeling methods and tools for 
socio-technical systems. In this context, SOCIONICAL aims at analyzing effects of 
Ambient Intelligence (AmI) devices (in terms of traffic psychology advanced driver

Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model for Driver Behavior 243 
assistance systems – ADAS). Therefore, an interesting research question in  
SOCIONICAL is the modeling of driver behavior including cognitive-emotional 
mechanisms of drivers and the analysis of potential effects of future AmI devices. 
In the following, some background information is given concerning agent-based 
modeling of driving behavior, AmI, ADAS, and C2X (car to infrastructure (C2I) 
communication with giving traffic information and recommendations to drivers, and 
car to car (C2C) communication with one car influencing others and vice versa) tech-
nology in road traffic, and influence of emotional state on driving behavior (chapter 
2). After that, the overall modeling approach is presented and the cognitive-emotional 
driver model explained by focusing on anger while driving. Furthermore, the parame-
ter specification and validation issues concerning the developed model are described 
(chapter 3). A summary and outlook concludes the paper (chapter 4). 
2   Background 
2.1   Agent-Based Modeling of Driving Behavior 
In the last years, agent-based modeling has become more and more popular in the 
social sciences and has created an own research approach within computational social 
sciences. Agent-based modeling is an approach to study effects of individual behavior 
on a system level by simulating the actions and interactions of autonomous individu-
als (agents). Different agents interacting with each other (multi-agent system) allow to 
observe emerging phenomena going beyond the properties of single agents.  
The modeling of driver behavior has become more and more important in the last 
years. Reasons for that are new technologies like ADAS and mobile ICT in the car 
that offer new ways for improving the overall performance and safety of road traffic. 
But in order to develop these systems according to users’ needs and to assess potential 
effects, the behavior of drivers (with and without new technologies) must be known. 
In reality, drivers are autonomous, dynami cally adapt their driving behavior to the 
dynamics of the surrounding environment, in teract with other drivers/vehicles, and 
want to achieve a specific goal. Moreover, dr ivers are characterized by a limited view 
of the whole system, incomplete information or capabilities to solve a problem,  
asynchronous acting, and a missing central control system [5]. Therefore, micro-
scopic, agent-based modeling is the appropriate method for modeling traffic. This 
approach has to take into consideration the limited capabilities of human drivers and 
their driving attitudes [6]. 
In general, two kinds of agents are distinguished: reactive agents and cognitive 
agents. Whereas a reactive agent links perceptions to responses and is e.g. used for 
describing general mechanisms of car following behavior, a cognitive agent is also 
able to perform knowledge based tasks and reasoning (e.g. including experience or 
memory). The differentiation between reactive and cognitive-emotional aspects of 
driving suggests a multi-layer architecture for describing the road user. Wahle et al. 
[5] choose a two-layer architecture and distinguish a tactical layer responsible for the 
task of driving, i.e. acceleration, braking, lane changing, and a strategic layer respon-
sible for information assimilation and decision making.

244 C. Maag, C. Mark, and H.-P. Krüger 
2.2   AmI, ADAS, and C2X Technology in Road Traffic 
The science of ambient intelligence explores technical possibilities to improve the 
way how environments could help people and how technology could help society [7]. 
Cook et al. [7] describe the “basic idea behind Ambient Intelligence (AmI) is that by 
enriching an environment with technology  (e.g. sensors and devices interconnected 
through a network), a system can be built such that acts as an ‘electronic butler’, 
which senses features of the users and their environment, then reasons about the  
accumulated data, and finally selects actions to take that will benefit the users in the 
environment.” (p. 278). Taking that idea into account, Cook et al. (2009) define ambi-
ent intelligence as “a digital environment that proactively, but sensibly, supports peo-
ple in their daily lives” (p. 279). 
In the last years, a variety of different systems assisting the driver were introduced 
in the market [8]. From safety systems that support the driver in safety-critical situa-
tions and stabilize the car (e.g. antilock brake system), over comfort systems that 
reduce the workload of the driver (e.g. crui se control), to information systems that 
carry out secondary tasks and give the driver important information (e.g. navigation 
system). Another banding of these systems is based on the level of intervention from 
information over recommendation and assistan ce to control [9]. Besides the intended 
safety and comfort issues [10], such systems are discussed because of their effects on 
traffic flow and environment [11]. 
Up to now, most of these technical systems are related to a single vehicle, e.g. 
automatic cruise control or lane departure warning. Such assistance functions carry 
out to some extend the same tasks as the driver. Therefore, the role of the driver  
begins to change from controlling to monitoring – the driver observes system per-
formance and intervenes only, if something is suboptimal. This could lead to new 
problems, e.g. reduced vigilance and situation awareness [12] [13].  
Currently, more and more ADAS are developed (e.g. hazard warning, automatic 
emergency call, intersection assistance) that are based on the C2X communication. 
Nevertheless, the actual consequences of such AmI systems for driving safety must be 
analyzed very carefully before they are brought to the market. 
2.3   Emotional State and Driving Behavior 
Driver state is an important factor influencing the individual evaluation of driving 
situations, the driving behavior, and the overall system characteristics of traffic. 
Driver state is a multidimensional construct. Exemplary dimensions are attentiveness 
(e.g. sleepy, reduced vigilance, awake), fitness to drive (e.g. no substances, driving 
under the influence of alcohol), and emotional state (e.g. anger, aggression). 
In the scientific literature, different reasons for aggressive driving are discussed. 
Some authors make the overall setting of driving (especially motorway driving) re-
sponsible for aggressive conflicts. The ability of the drivers to communicate with each 
other is very limited. Only by giving signals like blinker or high beam (that are often 
understood as aggressive) and by driving style (e.g. short headway, fast approaching 
of leading vehicle) drivers can communicate with others (Bösser, 1987). As direct 
communication is crucial in order to avoid misunderstandings, conflicts between 
drivers are very likely [14].

Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model for Driver Behavior 245 
Frustrating situations (e.g. a traffic jam or a leading vehicle on the left lane that is 
not changing to the right) are a starting point for driver aggression [15] [16] [17]. 
Such a situation could lead to anger and a tendency to behave aggressive. Mostly, 
aggressive driving could be understood as an expression of instrumental aggression, 
because drivers tailgate in order to reach a specific objective – e.g. being in due time 
at their destination. 
The mentioned situational factors that contribute to aggressive driving interact with 
personal factors. The personality of a driver (e.g. frustration tolerance, anger, sensa-
tion seeking) influences the coping behavior while confronted with a frustrating situa-
tion [16] [17] [18]. An additional phenomenon linked to aggressive driving lies in the 
emotional value of cars and driving. Therefor e, drivers feel personally insulted, if 
another person hinders their journey and frustrates them [19]. 
3   Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model of Driver 
3.1   Modeling Approach 
The objective of developing a cognitive-emotional driver model is to clarify the inter-
actions between driving behavior and emotional states during driving. Later on, this 
model can be implemented in agent-based modeling approaches of traffic and is used 
to study phenomena in road traffic that are based on cognitive-emotional mechanisms 
of drivers.  
The basic steps for driver modeling are: 
• Definition of prototypic traffic situations for later implementation in the driv-
ing simulator (example: tailgating driver on a motorway).  
Prototypic situations are demonstrated in the virtual environment of a driving 
simulator, in order to study the characteristics, triggering situations, phenome-
nology, and local consequences of emotional driving. 
• Description of driver behavior in these situations and parameter specification 
by performing driving simulator studies (example: behavior and emotional  
response of the driver who is tailgated). 
The parameter specification is based on behavior functions. A behavior func-
tion links characteristics of the traffic situation to driver emotions and  
behavior. 
• Modeling of driver behavior in these situations (example: emotional response 
as a function of following distance).  
A behavior model including cognitive-emotional processes is developed and 
validated (see chapter 3.2 and 3.3). 
After that, the developed cognitive-emotional driver model can be used. Exemplary 
application areas are the implementation of the driver model in the ambient traffic 
model of a driving simulation and in microscopic, agent-based traffic modeling.  
3.2   Cognitive-Emotional Driver Model 
The visualization of the cognitive-emotional driver model (Fig. 1) is based on the 
notation of the systems theory by Bischof [20] and is divided in a traffic layer and a

246 C. Maag, C. Mark, and H.-P. Krüger 
cognitive-emotional layer. The arrows stand for input or output variables. These vari-
ables are processed in units that are identifi ed by boxes or circles. The boxes in the 
traffic layer process objective and observable data (e.g. position of vehicles). The 
circles in the cognitive-emotional layer handle cognitive and/or emotional inputs that 
are not directly measurable or observable. The rounded boxes work on both types of 
input variables.  
The traffic layer covers the objective surrounding of the driver and contains a “tra-
ditional” driving model [21] [22]. That means the traffic layer specifies the longitudi-
nal and lateral behavior of a driver/vehicle unit and the changing of lanes depending 
on road characteristics, traffic situation, weather, etc. The cognitive-emotional layer 
models the driver who is able to change his driving behavior due to emotional  
responses and anticipation of future events. It contains internal processes of the driver 
(e.g. anger) and their interdependency with driving style and traffic situation.  
The model proposes the following key processes: (a) Detection of interactions be-
tween road users, (b) Calculation of final emotional response, (c) Influencing driving 
style, (d) Changing of driver’s maneuvers. 
• Detection of interactions between road users (box 5 and box 6): The positions 
and dynamics (speed, acceleration) of the surrounding vehicles (“POS and 
DYN of Vehicles”; output of box 6) in relation to the position and dynamics of 
the ego driver (“POS and DYN of EgoVehicle”; output of box 8) are used to 
detect dyadic (ego driver interacts with one surrounding vehicle) interactions 
of the surrounding traffic with the driver (this detection is done in box 5). 
These interactions are compared with the intentions of the driver (box 1) and 
influence driver state (box 2).  
• Calculation of the final emotional response (box 2 together with box 1, box 5): 
The emotional reaction of a driver is based on the following input: 
(a) Dyadic interactions with other drivers/vehicles (box 5 to box 2): The  
dyadic interactions with other driver s/vehicles are characterized by an 
emotional surplus. Emotional surplus means that dynamic interactions  
between vehicles have not just physical parameters (e.g. braking and fol-
lowing distance) but also emotional effects (e.g. anger). This emotional 
surplus is directly perceived by the driver and changes his driver state. 
(b) Evaluation of current traffic situation relating to driver intentions (box 1 to 
box 2): The driver evaluates the current traffic situation by relating it to 
his intentions. If e.g. other drivers constrain the driver in reaching his  
target speed, the driver feels reactive anger. 
(c) Inter-individual differences (“Person” to box 2): Depending on these dif-
ferences (e.g. trait of driving anger) and how the driver copes with the 
situation the final emotional response varies for different drivers. 
(d) Emotional memory (“Memory” to box 2): The final emotional response 
(output of box 2) is composed of the emotional reaction concerning  
the current traffic situation and the emotional short-term memory where 
the experience of former situations is stored.

Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model for Driver Behavior 247 
 
Fig. 1. Cognitive-emotional driver model 
• Influencing driving style (box 4 together with box2, box 3): The final emo-
tional response is an important input parameter for the driving style of a driver. 
The driving style can be operationalized by driving parameters like e.g. time 
headway (THW), time to collision (TTC), accepted longitudinal/lateral accel-
eration, and reaction time. The following factors influence driving style: 
(a) Driver state (final emotional response; box 2 to box 4): Driver state is well 
known as an influencing factor of driving style. E.g.: Angry drivers that 
are in conflict with other drivers hinder ing them to drive as fast as they 
want show different approaching and following behavior.  
(b) Anticipation (box 3 to box 4): Anticipation also influences driving style. If 
other drivers seem to drive abnormal (e.g. driving from the left side of the 
lane to the right side of the lane), the arousal and safety system of the 
driver recognizes this behavior pattern as potential dangerous and causes a 
more cautious driving style. 
(c) Contagion (box 6 to box 4): Contagion means a direct connection between 
traffic environment and driving style. The maneuvers of all surrounding 
vehicles influence the individual driving style. The driver is neither aware 
of this influence nor does contagion change the emotional state of a driver. 
• Changing of driver’s maneuvers (box 7, box 8): The driving style selects and 
shapes the driving maneuvers (output of box 7). An aggressive driver will 
show other driving maneuvers (or at least another likelihood for specific

248 C. Maag, C. Mark, and H.-P. Krüger 
driving maneuvers) than a cooperative one. This change of driving behavior is 
modeled by changing the parameters of a “traditional” driving model [21] [22]. 
Another input to box 7 (besides driving style) are the positions and dynamics 
of the surrounding vehicles. 
The model displayed will be further elaborated and validated by future driving simu-
lator studies. Some of the already existing evidence for the validity of the model is 
presented in the following chapter. 
3.3   Parameter Specification and Preliminary Validation of Model 
An important part of every modeling of human behavior is validation. Therefore, the 
behavior functions that specify the cognitive-emotional driver model have to be veri-
fied by empirical tests, e.g. in the driving simulator. In the following, some exemplary 
validation evidence is reported. 
The driving simulator used for the empirical studies is a pc-based simulator with 
motion system. The visual system of the simulator provides a horizontal field of view 
of 180 degrees and a vertical view of 47 degrees generated by LCD projectors and 
presented on a spherical projection screen with a diameter of 6m. The mockup con-
sists of a real BMW 520i that is cut off behind the B-pillar. Three mirrors (left, right 
and rear mirror) are realized via TFT displays that replace the real mirrors. For  
presenting a driving scenario 14 computers are connected via 100MBit Ethernet  
connection. The update frequency of the visual system is guaranteed to be 60Hz at 
minimum. The software of the simulator is called SILAB and was developed by the 
company WIVW GmbH. SILAB is a high-end driving simulation software that cre-
ates a realistic impression of driving which includes a complex simulation of vehicle 
dynamics, an image generation for urban, highway and rural scenarios, day and night 
simulation, and an eight channel sound simulation. SILAB supports Windows as well 
as Linux as operating systems. 
For the simulator studies subjects are chosen from a panel of drivers already 
trained in simulator driving. This training is important, in order to make the test driv-
ers familiar with the handling of the simulator and to reduce the problem of simulator 
sickness. 
Fig. 2 presents the first experiment. Eight subjects drive on the left lane of a mo-
torway (160 km/h) and approach a preceding vehicle (110 km/h). On the right lane 
further vehicles drive with 80 km/h. The distance of the vehicles on the right lane is 
70, 90, 110, or 130 meters. The subjects evaluate the situation and the driving behav-
ior of the vehicle in front of them. As the preceding vehicle never pulls into the gaps 
on the right lane, the subjects also report their feeling of anger. 
Fig. 3 shows the results of an analysis (ANOVA for repeated measurements) of the 
subjects’ answers. Both variables, the evaluation of the situation as well as the feeling 
of anger highly correspond with the gap size on the right lane. The greater the gap the 
more explicit is the request that the precedi ng vehicle should change to the right lane, 
F(3,21) = 24.53, p = .001, and the higher is the feeling of anger if this lane change is 
not performed, F(3,21) = 18.10, p = .001.

Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model for Driver Behavior 249 
         
  
Fig. 2. Analyzed traffic situation with birds-eye view (left) and driver’s view (right) (driving 
simulator study with 8 subjects) 
 Evaluation of situation
F(3, 21)=24.53, p=.001
70 90 110 130
Headway between vehicles on
right lane [m]
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
"Car in front should change
to right lane" [0...15]
 Feeling of anger
F(3, 21)=18.10, p=.001
70 90 110 130
Headway between vehicles on right
lane [m]
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
Feeling of anger [0...15]
 
Fig. 3. Evaluation of situation and feeling of anger depending on gap size on the right lane of a 
motorway (plotted are average values and 95% confidence intervals; evaluation and anger are 
measured on a scale from 0 to 15) 
Anger while driving elicits aggressive driving behavior. An example for aggressive 
approaching and following behavior is illustrated in Fig. 4. In this second experiment, 
the subjects drive with 160 km/h on a motorway and approache a preceding vehicle 
driving 120 km/h. The chart with the aggressive approaching behavior shows that an 
angry driver brakes later, has a significant lower minimum time-to-collision, and a 
much smaller following distance. 
In combination, the above reported results give strong evidence that drivers evalu-
ate the traffic situation and the behavior of other drivers and feel reactive anger if 
another vehicle hinders reaching the target speed (box 5, box 1, and box 2 in Fig. 1) 
The current level of driving anger influences driving style and results in a more  
aggressive approaching and following behavior (box 2, box 4, and box 7 in Fig. 1).

250 C. Maag, C. Mark, and H.-P. Krüger 
 Normal approaching and 
following behavior
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 0
Time [s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Headway [m], Speed difference 
[km/h], Time-to-collision [s]
 Headway
 Speed difference
 Time-to-collision
 Aggressive approaching and
following behavior
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 0
Time [s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Headway [m], Speed difference 
[km/h], Time-to-collision [s]
 Headway
 Speed difference
 Time-to-collision
 
Fig. 4. Example for normal and aggressive approaching and following behavior on a motorway 
(initial speed of driver is 160 km/h) 
4   Summary and Outlook 
Aggressive driving is a significant problem in  modern road traffic. Scientific research 
has yielded different explanations why drivers become angry and aggressive. That 
implies that (agent-based) modeling of driver behavior has to take into account emo-
tional and also cognitive processes of the driver, in order to be able to realistically 
explain the behavior of drivers. This article has presented a cognitive-emotional 
model of a driver. During the project SOCIONICAL this driver model will be elabo-
rated and validated in more detail and will be used to study the influence of individual 
driver actions on the overall characteristics of the traffic system.  
This driver model can be implemented in microscopic, agent-based traffic models 
and expands the output values of traffic modeling and analysis on cognitive and emo-
tional variables. An important research question will be the effect of innovative 
ADAS on driving behavior and driver state and emerging phenomena in traffic.  
Acknowledgements 
This work has been funded by the EU 7th Framework Programme research project 
“Complex socio-technical system in ambient intelligence” (SOCIONICAL) in the 
area of “Science of complex systems for socially intelligent ICT”. 
References 
1. Ellinghaus, D., Steinbrecher, J.: Verfall der Sitten? - Eine Untersuchung über die Entwick-
lung der Verkehrsmoral der letzten Jahrzehnte. Uniroyal-Verkehrsuntersuchung, Köln (2000) 
2. Maag, C., Krüger, H.-P., Breuer, K., Benmimoun, A., Neunzig, D., Ehmanns, D.: Aggres-
sionen im Straßenverkehr. In: Berichte der Bundesanstalt für Straßenwesen, M 151. 
Wirtschaftsverlag NW, Bremerhaven (2003)

Development of a Cognitive-Emotional Model for Driver Behavior 251 
3. Bösser, T.: Gefährliche und aggressive Verhaltensweisen des Fahrers bei der Regelung des 
Abstandes auf der Autobahn, vol. 3. TÜV Rheinland (1987) 
4. Parker, D., Lajunen, T., Summala, H.: Anger and aggression among drivers in three Euro-
pean countries. Accident Analysis and Prevention 34, 229–235 (2002) 
5. Wahle, J., Bazzan, A.L.C., Klügl, F., Schreckenberg, M.: The impact of real-time informa-
tion in a two-route scenario using agent-based simulation. Transportation Research Part 
C 10, 399–417 (2002) 
6. Burmeister, B., Doormann, J., Matylis, G.: Agen t-oriented traffic simulation. Transactions 
of the Society for Computer Simulation International 14, 79–86 (1997) 
7. Cook, D.J., Augusto, J.C., Jakkula, V.R.: Ambient intelligence: Technologies, applica-
tions, and opportunities. Pervasive and Mobile Computing 5, 277–298 (2009) 
8. Freyman, R.: Möglichkeit und Grenzen von Fahrerassistenz- und Aktiven Sicherheitssys-
temen. Aktive Sicherheit durch Fahrerassistenz, Garching (2004) 
9. Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T.B., Wickens, C.D.: A model for types and levels of human 
interaction with automation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part A: 
Systems and Humans 30, 286–297 (2000) 
10. Wiltschko, T.: Mikroskopische Unfallanalyse zur Identifikation von Wirkungsfeldern 
zukünftiger Fahrerassistenzsysteme. In: Tagungsband zu den 19. Verkehrswissen-
schaftliche Tage in Dresden, September 22-23, pp. 107.1–107.17 (2003) 
11. Benmimoun, A., Neunzig, D., Maag, C.: Effizienzsteigerung durch professionelles/ part-
nerschaftliches Verhalten im Straßenverkehr. In: FAT-Schriftenreihe Nr. 181. Forschungs-
vereinigung Automobiltechnik e.V., Frankfurt (2004) 
12. Bainbridge, L.: Ironies of Automation. Automatica 19, 2–27 (1983) 
13. Endsley, M.R.: Toward a Theory of Situa tion Awareness in Dynamic Systems. Human 
Factors 37(1), 32–64 (1995) 
14. Risser, R.: Verkehrsverhalten in Konfliktsitua tionen. Zeitschrift für Verkehrssicherheit 27, 
85–86 (1981) 
15. Doob, A.N., Gross, A.E.: Status of frustrator as an inhibitor of horn-honking responses. 
The Journal of Social Psychology 76, 213–218 (1968) 
16. Hennessy, D.A., Wiesenthal, D.L.: The relationship between traffic congestion, driver 
stress and direct versus indirect coping behaviours. Ergonomics 40(3), 348–361 (1997) 
17. Shinar, D.: Aggressive driving: The contribution of the drivers and the situation. Transpor-
tation Research Part F 1(2), 137–160 (1998) 
18. Deffenbacher, J.L., Oetting, E.R., Lynch, R.S.: Development of a driving anger scale. Psy-
chological Reports 74, 83–91 (1994) 
19. Atzwanger, K.: Biopsychische Aspekte aggressiven Autofahrens am Beispiel des Auf-
fahrverhaltens. In: Schulz, U. (ed.) Wahrnehmungs-, Entscheidungs- und Handlungspro-
zesse beim Führen eines Kraftfahrzeugs, pp. 131–155. Lit, Münster (1997) 
20. Bischof, N.: Struktur und Bedeutung. In: Eine Einführung in die Systemtheorie für Psy-
chologen. Hans Huber, Bern (1998) 
21. Helbing, D., Hennecke, A., Shvetsov, V., Treiber, M.: Micro- and macro-simulation of 
freeway traffic. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 35, 517–547 (2002) 
22. Wiedemann, D.: Simulation des Straßenverkehrsflusses. In: Schriftenreihe des Instituts für 
Verkehrswesen, Universität Karlsruhe, Heft 8, Karlsruhe (1974)

Modelling Dynamic Forgetting in Distributed
Information Systems
Nicolas Höning 1 and Martijn C. Schut2
1 Centrum Wiskunde en Informatica (CWI), Amsterdam, Netherlands
2 VU University, Department of Computer Science, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Abstract. We describe and model a new aspect in the design of distributed in-
formation systems. We build upon a previously described problem on the micro-
level, which asks how quickly agents should discount (forget) their experience:
If they cherish their memories, they can build their reports on larger data sets;
if they discount quickly, they can respond well to change in their environment.
Here, we argue that on the macro-level, where agents disseminate information,
the coordination of these micro-level strategies of discounting can have signif-
icant consequences on the system performance if the environment is uncertain.
In our proposed model, a referral network disseminates information about a dis-
ruptive environment (a service provider) to a risk-averse client agent, who uses
this information to maximise his proﬁt and then gives feedback into the refer-
ral system. We model two simple strategies to dynamically ﬁnd better discount-
ing factors, through central and decentral control. We show that with dynamic
discounting rates, the system can become more reactive. We discuss interdepen-
dence of the system components in the light of differing discounting scenarios.
In this work, we build on a certainty-based trust representation and operators for
it in referral systems, developed by Josang [7] and Hang, Wang and Singh [13,2].
1 Introduction
In dynamic environments, information beco mes less accurate over time – this is why
forgetting exists, as a reﬂection of uncertainty in a changing world. In many distributed
information systems that are modelled, the forgetting rate (in the literature, this is
mostly referred to as the discounting factor ) is set for all agents and never changes.
But by deﬁnition, autonomous agents can forget (discount) old information at a rate
of their choosing. Here, we propose a model to study this design aspect. We believe
it is necessary to investigate the problem that the nature of these micro-level decisions
can have signiﬁcant consequences on the macro-level, affecting the ability of the sys-
tem to accurately model the environment. This is certainly the case in sophisticated
information systems, where information is not merely passed on and accumulated, but
agents evaluate information before and after they pass it on. To our best knowledge, this
problem has not been investigated so far.
In particular, we investigate the interactions between agents in so-calledreferral net-
works, in which trust forms the basis of cooperation and information sharing between
agents. If such networks are employed in dynamic environments, then the agents in
the networks have to react to changing info rmation. This raises the question how each
P. J ˛edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 252–261, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Modelling Dynamic Forgetting in Distributed Information Systems 253
agent must decide for itself what part of the information that it has received so far re-
ﬂects the current situation best. We model these dynamics by a referral network which
disseminates information about a disruptive environment (a service provider who some-
times changes his quality level from good to bad or vice versa) to a risk-averse client
agent, who uses this information to maximise his proﬁt and then gives feedback into the
referral system.
Again more focused, for such referral networks, we look at the (distributed)discount-
ing of information, i.e., agents in a referral network discount old information to correctly
reﬂect the current situation, while trying to keep their evidence base (their "certainty")
as large as possible (this constitutes a trade-off as both old and new information have
their own value to the agent). For such discounting, one often employs a discounting
factor with which to deprecate information ( comparable to an interest rate on a loan).
This discounting factor affects the information directly, but indirectly it is also likely
to affect other information in the system. For instance, the information is evaluated in the
light of the trust of the recipient in the referrer before being passed on. The trust in the
referrer itself should be subject to discounting (to become independent from malicious
or badly informed referrers) and, in turn, is via feedback mechanisms evaluated on how
accurate the referred information was. Here, we provide a starting point to model this
seemingly complex design problem and investigatethebehaviour of twosimplestrategies.
The contributions of this paper are twofold: ﬁrstly, we model a service provision
setup in which distributed discounting in r eferral networks can be studied (here we
extend existing work by Singh and colleagues [2,11,12,14] on certainty-based trust
models for multi-agent systems). Secondl y, we perform a number of computer simu-
lation experiments, observing effects of distributed discounting strategies in different
disruptiveness-scenarios.
This paper is structured as follows. In the following section, we discuss relevant lit-
erature and position our work in the areas of certainty-based trust, referral networks
and inter-temporal value of information (i.e., balancing the factors of recency and cer-
tainty in order to make good decisions). In Section 3 we present our model, including
the referral network and the embedding of this networking between disruptive service
provider and risk-averse client. In Section 4 we describe simulation experiments we
performed on the system and analyse the outcomes of these experiments. We close in
Section 5 with conclusions and pointers for future work.
2 Literature
In this section, we discuss related literature concerning certainty-based trust (including
a complex representation of trust with an explicit notion of certainty), referral networks
(especially the work of Singh and colleagues on the issue of how to propagate trust
in such networks), and inter-temporal value of information (about how to effectively
balance the recency and certainty of information).
2.1 Certainty-Based Trust
Trust is based on experience (e.g., with other agents or with an uncertain environment in
general). The more experience a trustor collects about the trustee, the more accurate his

254 N. Höning and M.C. Schut
(a) Scalar trust vs Certainty-based trust
 (b) Probability distribution
Fig. 1. (a) Scalar trust vs certainty-based trust with uncertainty u. The ratio of belief b and dis-
belief d is equal in both charts. (b) An example probability distribution from [7], after 8 positive
and 1 negative results.
opinion (also called a trust report) should become. For this, every trust representation
needs to be accompanied with an update func tion, so that new experience somehow
alters the existing opinion. A trust report can then be seen as a compressed history of
experience. When agents translate their experience history into their trust reports, they
compress it and thereby need to give up some of the inherent information.
Various researchers have investigated how to do such compression effectively, see
[6,7,8]. While trust can be represented as a simple scalar (e.g.∈ [0, 1],i tm a yb em o r e
effectively to use a slightly more complex representation in which the certainty is rep-
resented explicitly. From a two-fold evidence space, where good and bad experiences
r and s are collected, we compute a three-fold belief space, where the third fold takes
uncertainty into account. See Figure 1(a) for an illustration. Initially, without any expe-
rience, everything is uncertain. As experien ce is added in evidence space, uncertainty
decreases in the belief space and certainty (which consists of belief plus disbelief) starts
to get its share. This helps to distinguish on how much experience a trust report is ac-
tually based. By calculating over evidence space, the certainty c∈ [0, 1] can be derived
from the integral of a probability density function (see Figure 1(b)), which we do ac-
cording to [12]. Then, the probability of a good outcome α = r
r+s ∈ [0, 1] deﬁnes how
certainty is divided into belief and disbelief.
2.2 Referral Networks
When agents make use of the trust reports provided by other agents, they form a referral
network. A referral network is an information dissemination system consisting of au-
tonomous and possibly self-interested agents. A referral is provided by agent B to agent
A by giving A a report about his (B’s) trust in C. The path from A to B to C is called a
referral path (and could in principle also extend over several other agents). Agents who
have no direct experience can only refer to other agents and are called referrers, while
agents who can provide their direct experience are called witnesses.
Referral networks have been studied widely (e.g. [11,1]) and are a state-of-the-art
technique to model information dissemination in multi-agent systems. Hereby, direct

Modelling Dynamic Forgetting in Distributed Information Systems 255
experience becomes indirect knowledge to its recipients. As such, trust (direct experi-
ence) becomes reputation (indirect knowledge).
For the precise formalisation of operators used in referral networks employing a
certainty-based trust representation, see [9] for the path operators aggregation and con-
catenation (which was reconsidered in [14]) and [2] for the update operator (which was
reconsidered by us in [4]). The update operator updates an agents trust in a referrer by
considering two other trust reports: the referred opinion and the agents actual (ex post)
opinion.
2.3 Discounting
The most basic approach to incorporate recency in one’s memory is that old experience
should be accounted for less, since circumstances might change over time. Discounting
mostly happens with a discounting factor. For instance, here is the formula used by [6]
for a simple scalar trust representation:
gd(tv, ev)= d∗ tv +( 1− d)∗ ev
where gd is the update function which updates the trust value tv∈ [−1, 1] in light of a
new experience ev∈ [−1, 1], using a discount factor d∈ [0, 1]. The existing tv is also
discounted by d to normalise the result of gd in the range [−1, 1].
For the addition of experience in eviden ce space, we use a similar update function
(following [2]), for r and s. Here is the update of existing r with new experience r′:
r = r′+( 1− β)∗ r
Note that the choice of the discounting factor β is crucial and should depend on the
situation at hand. Hang [2] experimented with varying static values for β in different
situations, but we have not come across any research in which agents use dynamic
values for β or choose their values themselves.
2.4 Recency and Certainty
Agents generally strive for more information in order to learn about their environment.
When they are more certain in their actions, they can take higher risks and maximise
their proﬁts. The trust model described in section 2.1 enables agents to build up certainty
over time, as agents interact. However, when stored experience gets forgotten, the cer-
tainty also decreases. Meanwhile, agents will have more accurate opinions if they base
their reports on more recent information. As agents in a trust syst em try to maximise
both of these values, a trade-off situation occurs: How much should old experience be
discounted in order to to beneﬁt from both certainty and recency?
Several researchers have noticed this issue (while none that we know of have focused
their analysis on it). For instance, [10] note the recency/certainty trade-off when agents
produce less failures with smaller history windows, but become more vulnerable to ma-
licious behaviour which exploits small history windows. Also, in [5] a simple reputation
system is modelled, in which two ﬁrms and many customers are present. Customers dis-
count their memories of direct experience and ﬁrms choose how to invest in their next

256 N. Höning and M.C. Schut
intended quality level, based on their current reputation. They show that discounting is
a necessary condition for equilibrium points to be reached but that uncertainty makes it
unlikely that the system reaches any equilibrium point.
To accumulate certainty is generally rewarding, unless the environment becomes too
uncertain for accumulated mem ory to yield any valuable predictions. In that case, a
focus on certainty can even be harmful as t he agent(s) will be too slow to react to a
disruption. In general, we do not need to speak of recency versus certainty: to some
degree, a system should manage to have both.
3M o d e l
We model a referral network - a system in which a client needs to learn about a service
provider and relies on referral agents for this. This network involveswitnesses who have
direct experience with the service provider and referrers who only deal with indirect
experience. The client knows all referrers and can access them to ask for information
and give them feedback. Each referrer has access to some other referrers, while only
some have access to a witness. We strictly separate referral agents from witness agents
for simplicity (such that an agent can only have one role).
A service provider provides a service, the quality of which can change between being
good or bad. The client asks several (randomly selected) referrers he knows for informa-
tion about the service quality. On each of those referral paths, he gets referred to another
referrer until he ﬁnds a witness. Then, information travels from the service provider as
ﬁrst-hand experience to witnesses. It then becomes reputation when the client makes
use of it. Note that he does not use the witnesses opinion as-is, but he incorporates the
referrers opinions about the agent (referrer or witness) they referred to. Thus, the client
needs to concatenate the trust values along the paths. Then, he aggregates the results
from all paths into one ﬁnal trust report, which represents the networks opinion. See
Figure 2 for a broad overview over information ﬂow. Note that also the client has direct
experience. In this system, this is solely used to evaluate the reputation information he
receives in order to give feedback.
Fig. 2. The referral network in our system, where solid arrows indicate ﬁrst-hand experience,
dotted arrows indicate referrals, and dashed arrows indicate feedback. The four types of agents
are explained in the text.

Modelling Dynamic Forgetting in Distributed Information Systems 257
Fig. 3. Functional overview of the service provision system
We use the notion of service provision to evaluate the effectiveness of information
dissemination. In particular, a client on one end of the referral network is about to use a
service on the other end of the referral network and uses the referred trust information
to calculate the risk he is prepared to take.
We view the service quality as an external input to the system and the clients utility as
an output. Furthermore, the client might provide evaluations and feedback as input into
the system. Figure 3 shows a functional system overview, modelling the referral sys-
tem (referrers and witnesses) as the system under consideration, with input and output
connected to the client and the service provider.
The general setting we want to investigate with this system is an uncertain, poten-
tially disruptive and non-deterministic environment, in which agents have ademand for
recency. For this, the disruptiveness of the service needs to be a controlled variable,
alike [3]. We implement a service provid er who initially provides good service. The
disruptiveness denotes the probability of service level disruptions between rounds (a
change from good to bad quality or vice versa).
On the other end of the system, the client implementation should model that there
is a demand for certainty . The assumption that certainty is useful has to be set into
practice. Therefore, we propose that the c lient can accumulate a payoff, representing
the usefulness of the system (to provide accu rate information). The client takes a risk
each round. He puts a stake into the interaction with the service provider. If the service
is good, his return is twice the stake he put in, otherwise he gets nothing back.
In our model, the stake is the belief of the referral network in a good service, minus
the disbelief. Thus, the stakes upper bound is the belief (if there is no disbelief) and the
lower bound is zero (if disbelief is higher than belief). Note that stakes would rise with
certainty, assuming the relation between belief and disbelief stays constant.
Finally, we make the agents act adaptively. This means that they control their own
views of the world (the trust in their neighbours and – in one scenario – their own
discounting behaviour). To inform the adaptation process, they need to receive feedback
from the client for each of their referrals. With this, they can use the update operator
(see Section 2.2) to update the trust in their neighbours and various mechanisms (to be
explained in Section 4.1) to update the discounting factor β.
4 Experiment
We have observed in preliminary experiments that the disruptiveness of the environment
signiﬁcantly affects the effectiveness of static discounting strategies (e.g. low values for

258 N. Höning and M.C. Schut
β (the discounting parameter, explained in section 2.3) are hurtful in highly disruptive
scenarios) and that this system is stable in the light of malicious witnesses and referrers
[4]. We turn now to an experiment in which values forβ are dynamically determined in
various ways1.
4.1 Setup
As dependent variables
, we measure the client payoff, the certainty reported by the
referral network, the clients stake and the values of β in referrers and witnesses. The
experiment ran for 1000 iterations and was conducted 30 times, with a population of 18
agents (10 referrers, 8 witnesses). We show the averages along with the sample standard
deviations.
In each run, the network structure was newly conﬁgured - agents were randomly
connected such that the client knew four of the referrers, each referrer knew three other
referrers and each witness was known by one re ferrer. The client asks all referrers for
opinions (and then concatenates and aggregates their reports to make a decision), while
referrers only ask one witness if they know one, or one random referrer otherwise. Each
round, the client updates his feedback in the ref errers and the referrers get the clients
feedback, so they can update their trust in the agent they referred to.
As independent variables
, we control the probability of service disruptions (we use
0.05 and 0.33) and the agents adaptation of their discounting factor β in response to
the accuracy of their referrals. We always let all agents begin with a value for β drawn
randomly from [0.1, 0.9].I nt h estatic scenario, all β values will stay ﬁxed during the
runs. We design two dynamic scenarios:
1. The centrally controlled scenario, in which the client deﬁnes the new β for all
agents, according to how accurately the network described his experience.
2. The decentrally controlled scenario, in which each referrer and witness uses the
feedback from the client to adjust his β himself. In order to do this, they keep
a trust in their own history of accuracy to, according to which they adjust their
discounting: β =1 − to.α (α denotes the probability of a good outcome, see
Section 2.1). When they learn through f eedback that their recent referrals were
accurate/misleading, they will thus lower/raise their β. In this experiment, we set
the β of to to 0.1.
4.2 Results and Discussion
In Figures 4(a) and 4(b), we see that payoff-wise, the dynamic scenarios fare much
better than the static scenario. As coul d be expected, it is beneﬁcial to adjust β values
according to the situation at hand. When the service quality changes, agents raise β in
order to discount old information that has just become less accurate. This way, stakes
rise faster in times of good service and drop faster in times of bad service, so big losses
are avoided. Note also that for a disruptiveness of 0.33, much less payoff can be made
than with 0.05, since much less certainty can build up in the trust reports.
1 The program code used to run these experiments can be openly accessed at
http://subversion.assembla.com/svn/trustcertprop/tags/kes_paper/

Modelling Dynamic Forgetting in Distributed Information Systems 259
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
payoff
iteration
static
decentral
central
(a) Avg. payoffs for disruptiveness = 0.33
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
payoff
iteration
static
decentral
central
(b) Avg. payoffs for disruptiveness = 0.05
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
beta
iteration
static
decentral
central
(c) Avg. β in referrers and witnesses asked in
this round
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
avg. referred certainty
iteration
static
decentral
central
(d) Avg. certainty of the referral net’s trust
report
Fig. 4. Results of all runs
Interestingly, the performance between both dynamic scenarios does not differ sig-
niﬁcantly. Let us consider the inner workings a bit closer. In Figure 4(c), we see that the
decentral scenario uses (on average) higher values for β. See Figure 5(a) for a the de-
velopment of beta values in a sample run. While the values in the central scenario spike
rapidly and then quickly return to near-zer o, values in the decentral scenario are more
diverse and higher. This is due to theirto.α being lower, since theirβ is not aligned with
the β of the client, whose feedback determinesto. Thus, lower certainty is accumulated
by referrers and witnesses (see Figure 4(d)). Note also that in the static scenario, very
little certainty accumulates due to inﬂexibility of β.
In spite of higher values for β, the referral network in the decentralised scenario
generally manages to give equally valuable signals for the investment behaviour of the
client. See Figure 5(b) for stakes invested in a single run. Recall that the stake is cal-
culated by max(0,b e li e f− disbelief). The certainty in the trust report of the referral
network is belief + disbelief , so if the stakes are (roughly) equally high with lower
certainty, this most likely means that in the decentralised scenario, agents refer stronger
opinions (a higher value of belief− disbelief , which normally happens with higher
values for β).

260 N. Höning and M.C. Schut
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
beta
iteration
static
decentral
central
(a) Avg. β in referrers and witnesses asked in
this round
-1
-0.5
 0
 0.5
 1
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
avg. stake
iteration
static
decentral
central
(b) stakes earned/lost by the client
Fig. 5. Results of a single run
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we approach a trade-off between certainty and recency which each infor-
mation system faces when its environment is uncertain. We develop previous research
in certainty-based trust in referral netwo rks into a model where this trade-off can be
studied. Then we run initial experiments in w hich the agents dynamically ﬁnd better
discounting factors.
In our model, a referral network disseminates information from a disruptive envi-
ronment (a service provider agent) to a risk-averse client agent, who uses this informa-
tion to maximise his proﬁt and then gives feedback into the referral system. We model
two simple strategies to dynamically ﬁnd better discounting factors (β)i nad i s t r i b u t e d
multi-agent context. In the ﬁrst scen ario, the client agent chooses one β centrally. In
the second scenario, all agents in the referral network choose their next β themselves,
based on the clients feedback about their last referral. Both strategies are signiﬁcantly
better in maximising the clients pay-off than static values for β, though they seem to
differ much in their behaviour.
In future work, the behaviours of these two strategies will be investigated closer in
order to discover interaction effects on referral paths, and surely there can be new ideas
on how to dynamically and decentrally compute discounting factors. Furthermore, one
could make the agents more complex in various ways, for instance by letting them
reason about future dynamics of the world. Another direction could be to investigate
how incentives to agents to behave self-inter ested affects the recency/certainty trade-
off. To model this, the client agent could be r equired to share parts of its generated
utility as payments for referrals.
References
1. Ding, L., Kolari, P., Ganjugunte, S., Finin, T., Joshi, A.: Modeling and evaluating trust net-
work inference. In: Seventh International Workshop on Trust in Agent Societies (2005)
2. Hang, C., Wang, Y ., Singh, M.P.: An adaptiv e probabilistic trust model and its evaluation.
In: Proceedings of the 7th international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multia-
gent systems, vol. 3, pp. 1485–1488 (2008)

Modelling Dynamic Forgetting in Distributed Information Systems 261
3. Harrington Jr., J.: The social selection of ﬂexible and rigid agents. American Economic
Review (1998)
4. Höning, N.: Discounting experience in referral networks. Master’s thesis, VU University,
Amsterdam (2009)
5. Huberman, B., Wu, F.: The dynamics of reputations. Computing in Economics and Finance
(2003)
6. Jonker, C.M., Treur, J.: Formal Analysis of Models for the Dynamics of Trust Based
on Experiences. In: Garijo, F.J., Boman, M. (eds.) MAAMAW 1999. LNCS, vol. 1647,
pp. 221–231. Springer, Heidelberg (1999)
7. Jøsang, A.: A subjective metric of authentication. Lecture notes in computer science,
pp. 329–344 (1999)
8. Jøsang, A., Hayward, R., Pope, S.: Trust network analysis with subjective logic. In: Proceed-
ings of the 29th Australasian Computer Science (2006)
9. Jøsang, A., Ismail, R., Boyd, C.: A survey of trust and reputation systems for online service
provision. Decision Support Systems (2007)
10. Keung, S.N., Grifﬁths, N.: Using recency and relevance to assess trust and reputation.
In: Proceedings of AISB 2008 Symposium on Behaviour Regulation (2008)
11. Singh, M.P., Yolum, P.: Emergent properties of referral systems. In: 2nd International Joint
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 592–597 (2003)
12. Wang, Y .: Evidence-Based Trust in Distributed Agent Systems. PhD thesis, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh (2009)
13. Wang, Y ., Singh, M.P.: Trust representation and aggregation in a distributed agent system.
Science (2006)
14. Wang, Y ., Singh, M.P.: Formal trust model formultiagent systems. In: Proceedings of Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI 2007), pp. 1551–1556 (2007)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 262–271, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Integrated Modeling of Cognitive Agents in  
Socio-technical Systems 
Alexei Sharpanskykh 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Artificial Intelligence,  
De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
sharp@few.vu.nl 
Abstract. Modern socio-technical systems are characterized by high structural 
and behavioral complexities, which impede understanding and modeling of 
such systems. In particular, reciprocal relations between diverse local system 
processes that determine global system dynamics are not well understood. In 
this paper we focus on the problem of establishing relations between cognitive 
processes that determine social dynamics of an actor in a socio-technical  
system. To address this problem, a formal, integrated, agent-based modeling 
approach is proposed. The approach de fines relations between such cognitive 
processes as belief revision, trust dynamics, generation and development of 
feelings and emotions, and decision making. Furthermore, it is described how 
the behavior of an agent is related to its cognitive dynamics. Preliminary  
experimental results for the approach are discussed in the paper. 
1   Introduction 
Modern socio-technical systems are characterized by high structural and behavioral 
complexities. These systems include hardware and software components with a vary-
ing degree of autonomy and complexity that interact with and enable interaction be-
tween humans. Among highly autonomous technical components are ambient devices, 
dedicated to assist humans in the achievement of their objectives (e.g., to maintain 
well-being, to complete a task in time). Modeling and analysis of modern socio-
technical systems is a challenging task. Models of such systems should account for 
complexity of human behavior, heterogeneity and autonomous behavior of technical 
systems, and interaction among all system actors. Both quantitative and qualitative 
system properties are required to be modeled. Furthermore, relations between diverse 
processes and states of different aggregation levels of a system should be defined  
explicitly. Whereas the last modeling requirement has been addressed in Systems Biol-
ogy and Physics of Complex Systems with some success, it constitutes a serious issue 
for modeling complex socio-technical systems. In this paper we focus on the problem 
of establishing reciprocal relations between cognitive processes that determine decision 
making and social behavior of an intelligent, autonomous actor in a socio-technical 
system. According to the literature [3, 4] among these cognitive processes are percep-
tion, belief revision, learning, trust dynamics, generation and development of feelings 
and emotions. The author is not aware of any existing formal cognitive model that 
incorporates all these processes and defines relations between them. To address this

Integrated Modeling of Cognitive Agents in Socio-technical Systems 263 
gap, a formal approach for integrated modeling of cognitive agents in complex socio-
technical systems is proposed in this paper. The proposed agent model is generic and 
can be used for modeling both human and artificial actors. In contrast to other existing 
agent models (cf [6]), cognitive states of agents (e.g., beliefs) used in decision-making 
are assumed to be emotionally loaded, which agrees with many research findings, e.g., 
[2, 3]. Furthermore, many modeling principles from Neuroscience were used in the 
proposed model, similar to the ones described in [2, 8]. 
The paper is organized as follows. A formal logic-based modeling language is in-
troduced in Section 2. In Section 3 modeling externally observable behavior of an 
agent is described. Integrated modeling of cognitive dynamics of an agent is consid-
ered in Section 4. Some preliminary experi mental results are provided in Section 5. 
Section 6 concludes the paper. 
2   Modeling Language 
To specify dynamic properties of a system, the order-sorted predicate logic-based 
language called LEADSTO is used [1]. Dynamics in LEADSTO is represented as 
evolution of states over time. A state is characterized by a set of properties that do or 
do not hold at a certain point in time. To specify state properties for system compo-
nents, ontologies are used which are defined by a number of sorts, sorted constants, 
variables, functions and predicates (i.e., a signature). For every system component A a 
number of ontologies can be distinguished: the ontologies IntOnt(A), InOnt(A),   
OutOnt(A), and ExtOnt(A) are used to express respectively internal, input, output and 
external state properties of the component A. Input ontologies contain elements for 
describing perceptions of an agent from the external world, whereas output ontologies 
describe actions and communications of agents. For a given ontology Ont, the proposi-
tional language signature consisting of all state ground atoms based on Ont is denoted 
by APROP(Ont). State properties are specified based on such ontology  by propositions 
that can be made (using conjunction, negation, disjunction, implication) from the 
ground atoms. Then, a state S is an indication of which atomic state properties are 
true and which are false: S: APROP(Ont) → {true, false}.  
LEADSTO enables modeling of direct temporal dependencies between two state 
properties in successive states, also called dynamic properties . A specification of 
dynamic properties in LEADSTO is executable and can be depicted graphically. The 
format is defined as follows. Let α and β be state properties of the form ‘conjunction 
of atoms or negations of atoms’, and e, f, g, h  non-negative real numbers. In the 
LEADSTO language the notation α →→e, f, g, h  β means: if state property α holds for a 
certain time interval with duration g, then after some delay (between e and f) state 
property β will hold for a certain time interval of length h. When e = f = 0 and g = h = 1, 
called standard time parameters, we shall write α→→ β. To indicate the type of a state 
property in a LEADSTO property we shall use prefixes  input(c), internal(c) and output(c), 
where c is the name of a component. Consider an example dynamic property:  
input(A)|observation_result(fire) →→ output(A)| performed(runs_away_from_fire) 
Informally, this example expresses that if agent A observes fire during some time unit, 
then after that A will run away from the fire during the following time unit.

264 A. Sharpanskykh 
In addition, LEADSTO allows expressing mathematical operations, e.g. 
has_value(x, v) →→ e, f, g, h  has_value(x, v*0.25).  
3   Modeling Externally Observable Behavior of an Agent 
From the external perspective the behavior of an agent is specified by dynamic rela-
tions between agent's input and output states, corresponding to interaction with other 
agents and with the environment. An agent perceives information by observation and 
communication and generates output in the form of communication or actions. Com-
munications are formalized as speech acts (e.g., inform, request, order) using the 
function  
communicated_from_to(ag1:AGENT, ag2:AGENT, s_act:SPEECH_ACT, message:STATPROP),  
here agent ag1 communicates speech act s_act to agent ag2 with the content message. 
Agents may communicate information about the environment (e.g., accessibility of 
locations), about other agents (e.g., their location, physical and mental condition), 
about plans to act (in form of informative messages, recommendations and orders to 
follow). A value from the interval [0, 1]  is associated with each speech act of type 
inform, indicating the agent's confidence in the communicated message. For this the 
function has_confidence(message:STATPROP, v:VALUE)  is used. For example, the  
communication of agent a1 to agent a2 about the accessibility of a location l1 from 
location l2 with confidence 0.9 is formalized as communicated_from_to(a1, a2, inform, 
has_confidence(is_accessible_from(l1, l2), 0.9)). Note that information about the dynamics 
of events and processes (e.g., about the rate of change) may be also communicated by 
agents. For example, the communication about the rate of change of smoke concentra-
tion with confidence 0.7 is formalized as communicated_from_to(a1, a2, inform, 
has_confidence(has_rate_of_change(smoke_concentration, 0.0001), 0.7)).  
Now observations of agents are considered. Passive and active observations are 
distinguished. In contrast to a passive observation, an active observation is always 
concerned with the agent's initiative. An active observation of a state property  p by an 
agent in the environment is formalized using the function to_be_observed(p: 
STATE_PROPERTY). Observation results are provided  to the agent's input using the 
function observation_result(p: STATE_PROPERTY) , which indicates whether p holds in 
the environment or for another agent. Similarly to an informative communication, a 
degree of confidence is associated with an observation, as some observations may not 
be completely reliable (e.g., due to smoke).  
Actions of an agent generated at its output are specified by performed(act:ACTION). 
4   Modeling Cognitive Dynamics of an Agent 
From the internal perspective the behavior of an agent is characterized by causal rela-
tions between internal states of the agent, based on which externally observable be-
havioral patterns are generated. The externally observable behavior of an agent is 
determined largely by the agent's decision making. The process of decision making of 
an agent in a highly dynamic environment (e.g., during an evacuation) is influenced 
by information provided to the agent by diverse information sources. The higher the

Integrated Modeling of Cognitive Agents in Socio-technical Systems 265 
agent's trust in an information source the more the agent is apt to accept information 
from this source and to adapt its beliefs using this information. It is often claimed that 
most beliefs of a human agent are emotionally loaded [2, 3]; also trust of an agent to a 
source and decision making are influenced by feelings and emotions. In the following 
the agent's internal states and cognitive processes, and relations between them are 
described in detail.  
4.1   Feelings and Emotions 
It is often claimed that cognitive states of a human, such as sensory or other represen-
tations induce emotions felt within the human [2, 3]. According to Damasio [2], emo-
tion generation proceeds via a body loop in the following causal chain: 
cognitive state  →  preparation for the induced bodily response → induced bodily response → 
sensing the bodily response → sensory representation of the bodily response → induced feeling 
As a variation, an as if body loop  uses a direct causal relation as a shortcut in the 
causal chain: preparation for the induced bodily response → sensory representation of the 
induced bodily response. The body loop (or ‘as if body loop’) is extended to a recursive 
body loop (or recursive ‘as if body loop’) by assuming that the preparation of the 
bodily response is also affected by the state of feeling the emotion as an additional 
causal relation: feeling → preparation for the bodily response . Thus, agent emotions are 
modeled based on reciprocal causation relations between emotion felt and body states, 
as shown in Fig 1. Within a model of agent's emotions both the bodily response and 
the feeling are assigned a level or gradation, expressed by a number, which is as-
sumed dynamic. The causal cycle is modeled as a positive feedback loop, triggered by 
a cognitive state and converging to a certain level of feeling and body state. Here in 
each round of the cycle the next body state has a level that is affected by both the 
cognitive state and the level of the feeling state, and the next level of the feeling is 
based on the level of the body state. Formally causation relations are modeled by 
LEADSTO properties. 
For example, consider a property for generation of a sensory state and for the 
preparation state update: 
output(environment)|world_state(s, v) →→ input(agent)|sensory_state(s, v) 
internal(agent)|(feeling(b, v1) & preparation_state(b, v2)) →→ internal(agent)|preparation_state(b, 
func(v1, v2)) 
Belief, trust, and other cognitive states considered in the agent model induce body 
loops similar to the one from Fig.1. In the following section, belief and trust states, 
and relations between them are considered in more detail.  
4.2   Beliefs and Trust  
Beliefs of an agent are time-labeled internal representations created based on commu-
nication and observation results received by the agent. Beliefs are specified using the 
function belief(p:STATPROP, v:VALUE, t:TIME) , here p is the content of the belief, v is  
the degree of confidence of the agent from the interval [0, 1]  that the belief is true at 
the time point t. After obtaining a communication from an information source, the 
agent creates the belief about the communication of the source. Furthermore,  
the agent revises its own belief(s) taking into account the communication content.

266 A. Sharpanskykh 
Belief revision is considered further in this section. As beliefs are modeled as emo-
tionally loaded, the confidence value for a belief state is updated continuously in an 
‘as if body loop’ described in section 4.1. From a neurological perspective the  
existence of a connection from feeling to be lief may be also considered plausible, as 
neurons involved in the belief and in the associated feeling will often be activated 
simultaneously. Therefore, such a connection from feeling to belief may be developed 
based on a general Hebbian learning mechanism [5] that strengthens connections 
between neurons that are activated simultaneously. A formal model based on such a 
mechanism is described in [8]. Taking this model as a starting point, we extend it  
by relating beliefs to trust and by a belief update mechanism as described in the  
following. 
world_state(w, v)
sensory_state(w, v)
cognitive_state(s, v)
preparation_state(b, v) effector_state(b, v)
body_state(b, v)
feeling(b, v)sensory_
representation_state(b, v)
sensory_state(b, v)
 
Fig. 1. Body loop induced by a cognitive state; v denotes a real variable, w is a world state and 
b is a body state 
In our model trust is an emotional attitude of an agent towards an information 
source (e.g., another human agent, an ambient device) that determines the extent to 
which information received by the agent from the source influences agent’s belief(s). 
The amount of trust to a source is represented by a feeling value - a number from the 
range [0, 1] -  which accumulates all experience with the source. The influence of in-
formation communicated by an information source s concerning a world state w on 
the agent ag’s belief is specified by the following property (all variables are univer-
sally quantified): 
current_time(t) & internal(ag)|(feeling(b2, v2) & body_state_for(b2, accept_from(s)) & feeling(b, 
v4) & belief(w, v3, t) & body_state_for(b, w)) &  
input(ag)|communicated_from_to(s, ag, inform, has_confidence(w, v1))  
→→ internal(ag)|belief(w, v3 + γ1⋅(g(v1,v2, v3, v4, β1, β2) - v3) ⋅ Δt, t+Δt),  
where g(a, b, c, d, β1, β2) = β1⋅(1-(1-h(a, b, c, β2))⋅(1-d)) + (1-β1)⋅h(a, b, c, β2)⋅d and  
h(x, y, z, β) = (1- β)⋅z + β⋅(z + y⋅(x – z)) 
γ1 determines the speed of the belief update; parameter  β1 in g(a, b, c, d, β1, β2) deter-
mines the agent’s disposition to amplify positive  ( β1 > 0.5) or negative  ( β1 < 0.5)  
experience (i.e., optimistic and pessimistic attitudes); parameter  β in h(x, y, z, β) deter-
mines to which extent the old confidence value is present in the new value.  
From this property follows that the less the agent’s trust towards an information 
source (i.e., feeling for accepting information from the source), the less the effect of 
communication from this source on the agent’s beliefs. Agent beliefs are updated

Integrated Modeling of Cognitive Agents in Socio-technical Systems 267 
based on the agent’s own observations in a similar manner. In this case the trust value 
is interpreted as the agent’s estimation of the reliability of its own observation. 
The trust to a source builds up over time based on the agent's experience with the 
source. In particular, when the agent has a positive (negative) experience with the 
source, the agent's trust to the source incr eases (decreases). Currently experiences are 
restricted to information experiences only. An information experience with a source is 
evaluated by comparing the information provided by the source with the agent's be-
liefs about the content of the information provided. The experience is evaluated as 
positive (negative), when the information provided by the source is confirmed by 
(disagree with) the agent's beliefs. The emotional content of trust is modeled by an as 
if body loop. The experience with an information source is accumulated in the feeling 
state for accepting information from the source. The preparation state in the ‘as if 
body loop’, which determines the value for the feeling state is defined as follows: 
current_time(t) & internal(ag)|(feeling(b1, v2) & preparation_state(b1, v3) & belief(w, v4, t) & 
body_state_for(b1, accept_from(s)) &  
input(ag)|communicated_from_to(s, ag, inform, has_confidence(w, v1)) 
→→ internal(ag)|preparation_state(b1, v3+ γ2⋅ (g(v1, v2, v3, v4, β4, β5, β6, β7) - v3) ⋅ Δt) 
where g(x, y, z, u, α1, α2, α3, α4) = α1⋅(1 - (1 - h(x, z, u, α2, α3, α4))⋅(1-y)) + (1-α1)⋅ h(x, z, u, 
α2, α3, α4) ⋅ y,  
α1 determines the agent’s disposition to amplify positive or negative experience; 
h(x, z, u, α2, α3, α4) = (1- α2)⋅z + α2⋅er(x, u, α3, α4), α2 determines to which extent the old 
preparation value is taken in the generation of the new preparation value; 
r(x, u, α3, α4) = - α3⋅α4⋅|x – u|; β3 determines the agent’s tolerance to the difference  
between its own beliefs and information communicated by the source. 
As beliefs of an agent change over time, so changes evaluation of experiences and, 
consequently, the trust to sources. Every time when a trust relation with a source 
changes, the confidence values of the beliefs influenced by communication from this 
source are re-evaluated. The belief re-evaluation is done using beliefs about commu-
nications and observation received in the past. Note that a communication about a 
dynamic event is evaluated taking into account the agent’s belief(s) about the form of 
the dynamics of the event (e.g., expressed by a temporal formula). Furthermore, the 
more the distance between the communication time point and the evaluation time 
point, the less the effect of the communicatio n on the current trust value to the source. 
For example, an agent may receive information about a low concentration of smoke at 
some location. If the agent knows that the smoke concentration at that location in-
creases over time, then it would expect a higher smoke concentration at the location in 
the future (according to the communicated information) and evaluate this communica-
tion accordingly. The developed re-evaluatio n procedure is rather elaborated; it is 
provided in Appendix A with a detailed model description [9]. 
4.3   Decision Making  
Agents act according to adopted plans. A plan is a (partially) ordered set of actions, 
required to be done to satisfy agent's desires. Plans are represented as beliefs and can 
be communicated between agents. For example, a part of plan P1 that specifies for an 
agent the sequence of locations to walk through {l1, l2, l3}  is formalized as be-
lief(follows_after_in(go_to_location_from(l3, l2), go_to_location_from(l2, l1), P1), 1).

268 A. Sharpanskykh 
Plan descriptions vary in the degree of specificity. Abstract (or partial) plans  
contain high level actions that can be further refined into more specific actions.  
Furthermore, alternative ways of refinement of high level actions can be specified. In 
an evacuation scenario an agent may have several plans how to reach possible exits. 
These plans may be partial and contain movement actions between significant loca-
tions only (such as junction points, locations with elevators, stairs). There could be 
different paths between two significant positions.  
In the model an agent evaluates each plan option using the following criteria: 
(1) Desirability of an option: to which extent the option brings to the satisfaction of 
the current desire(s). 
(2) Possibility to realize : indicates the agent's confidence that the plan option can 
be realized. 
(3) The amount of effort: how much effort needs to be invested to realize the option 
(depends on the skills, knowledge, physical and other agent characteristics).  
For each evaluation criterion a constraint(s) may be defined (e.g., in terms of thresh-
olds). If in the evaluation of an action from a plan a violation of a constraint is identi-
fied, then the evaluation of the whole option can be ceased and the option is considered 
as inapplicable. 
An agent evaluates options using its beliefs. Furthermore, a change of agent's be-
liefs about the environment may result into a change of agent's plan options.  
The literature [4, 7] confirms that feelings influence the process of evaluation of 
options. To account for this in our model, an aggregated value based on the evaluated 
criteria (e.g., a weighted average) for an optio n is provided as input for an ‘as if body 
loop’ as shown in Fig.2. 
After all available plan options have been evaluated the agent chooses and commits 
to the one with the highest feeling value: 
preparation_state(b, V)
feeling(b, V)
sensory_
representation(b, V)
belief(desirability_of(o1), V)
belief(amount_of_effort_for(o1), V)
belief(possibility_to_realize(o1), V)
 
Fig. 2. ‘As if body loop’ for the evaluation of an option o1; V is a real variable, b is a body 
state 
internal(ag)|(feeling(b, v) & body_state_for(b, plan(p))) & ∀p1:PLAN, b1:BODY_STATE, 
v1:VALUE [internal(ag)| (feeling(b1, v1) & body_state_for(b1, plan(p1))) → v1 < v  ] 
→→ output(ag)| performed(commit_to(p)) 
After the agent has committed to a plan, it evaluates all possible refinements of the 
first action of the plan along the same evaluation criteria as for plans and chooses the

Integrated Modeling of Cognitive Agents in Socio-technical Systems 269 
one with the highest feeling. In the literature [4] it is recognized that when a human 
has high stress close to panic, it uses diverse shortcuts in the evaluation of options. 
We elaborated a number of such shortcuts, which will be discussed elsewhere. 
5   Experiments 
The proposed agent model has been applied in a number of variants of a subway 
evacuation scenario, which is a simplified version of a real incident. In the scenario an 
explosion occurred in a trai n situated in an underground tunnel between two stations. 
The explosion was followed by fire and smoke, which were spreading throughout the 
tunnel. Because of the blast some doors were  damaged, so people were able to escape 
outside of the train through the formed openings. Most of the people did not have a 
clear idea what was going on and how to es cape. The train driver guided people to 
exits of the tunnel. Many evacuees had a high trust towards the driver. People propa-
gated available information about paths to exits, accessibility of locations, and danger 
(smoke, fire) to others. All electronic communication channels with the outside world 
were broken. Variants of the scenario were considered in which some people pos-
sessed ambient devices, which communicated available information to other devices 
in their range. People were trying to find their way to an exit. In the following we 
consider how different aspects of this scenario were modeled. 
Modeling the environment 
The layout of the environment is modeled as a graph-like structure defined by a set of 
locations (nodes) that agents and passive objects may occupy and a set of edges be-
tween pairs of locations. With each edge a measure of distance is associated. Agents 
and other objects (e.g., smoke, fire) move around, over different locations. Objects in 
the environment may have certain state attributes. These attributes may change over 
time, for example, a person may become injured or unconscious or a location may 
become inaccessible. The dynamics of environmental processes is described by 
LEADSTO properties.  
Modeling agents 
Agents communicate and maintain beliefs about: possible paths to exits; accessibility 
of locations on these paths; the degree of  danger of each location on these paths  
determined by the amount of smoke and fire; the dynamics of the smoke and fire 
propagation; the dynamics of accessibility of locations. The creation and update of the 
beliefs of agents is performed as described in Section 4.2. The correctness and com-
pleteness of information about the environment possessed by agents vary depending 
on their previous knowledge and information acquired during the evacuation. An 
agent communicates its beliefs to all other agents at its location only when it has a 
high confidence that this information is correct ( ≥ 0.75). Agents do not repeat informa-
tion already communicated. Information is  communicated in turns. Agents are  
socially unrelated and have neutral trust to each other ( 0.5 initially). The only excep-
tion is the train driver agent, who is highly trusted (0.9 initially). 
When an agent comes to a location, it updates all its plans (i.e., possible paths to 
exits) with respect to its current location. In the following it is discussed how plans in 
the evacuation scenario are evaluated along the criteria proposed in Section 4.3:

270 A. Sharpanskykh 
0 20 40 600
5
10
15
0 20 40 600
5
10
15
0 10 20 30 400
5
10
15
(1) Desirability of an option: depends on the agent's beliefs about how close the 
agent's state will be to the state of being evacuated after the execution of the plan. 
(2) Possibility to realize: calculated based on the confidence values of the agent's 
beliefs about the accessibility of locations in the plan and the degree of danger of each 
of these locations. These beliefs take into account the agent's representation of the 
environmental dynamics (e.g., about smoke spreading) and the agent's average speed. 
Formally, the possibility to realize option p by agent ag is calculated as: 
r =  ω1⋅Σvi∈PS vi / |PS| + ω2⋅Σei∈DS ei / |DS|, here ω1 and ω2 are weights, 
PS = { (v – access_accept)/(1 – access_accept) | ∃l1, l2, l3: LOCATION, t:TIME, av, d:VALUE 
present_time(t) & current_location(ag, l1) & average_speed(ag, av) & distance_between (d, l1, l2) 
& internal(ag)| (belief(is_accessible_from(l3, l2), v, t+d/av) & be-
lief(step_of_plan(go_to_location_from(l3, l2), p), 1, t))} 
DS = { (danger_accept – v)/danger_accept |  ∃l1, l2, l3: LOCATION, t:TIME, av, d:VALUE pre-
sent_time(t) & current_location(ag, l1) & average_speed(ag, av) & distance_between (d, l1, l3) & 
internal(ag)|(belief(is_dangerous(l3), v, t+d/av) & belief(step_of_plan(go_to_location_from(l3, l2), 
p), 1,  t))} 
 (3) The amount of effort is calculated based on the agent's beliefs about the dis-
tance to the exit: effp = 2⋅(d-3)/(1+(d-3)2), where d is the number of locations in plan p. 
The total value for option p is calculated as: evalp = ω3⋅dp + ω4⋅ rp + ω5⋅effp. 
In the developed simulation model 15 unrelated heterogeneous agents were speci-
fied. The parameters of the agent models were drawn for the uniform distribution on 
the unit interval. Below some results for three variations of the scenario are given. 
Variation 1 (Fig.3a): The driver agent provides information about paths to exits. A 
part of this information is incorrect. The simulation showed that some agents followed 
the driver’s directions even after the driver’s mistake was revealed. Other agents were 
losing trust to the driver quickly after finding the mistake, and preferred not to use the 
information regarding paths to exit provided by the driver after that.  
Variation 2  (Fig.3b): An agent unknown to other agents possesses complete and 
correct information about paths to the exits. The agent communicates this information 
to other agents which it meets. In the simulation a small number of agents used this 
information and found the way to an exit quickly. Many other agents did not trust the 
received information and continued searching for an exit themselves. 
(a)                                                (b)                                                       (c) 
Fig. 3. Evacuation of the agents over time in different variants of the scenario; x-axis is time in 
minutes; y-axis is the number of evacuated agents 
Variation 3  (Fig.3c): 7 agents use ambient devices able to communicate to other 
devices (the coverage radius is 3 locations) the same types of information as human 
agents. A device also exchanges information with its agent-owner. 2 devices  
are spreading wrong information. In the simulation first many human agents were

Integrated Modeling of Cognitive Agents in Socio-technical Systems 271 
misguided because of the spread of wrong information. However, the sources of 
wrong information were rapidly identified by the agents and trust to them decreased 
rapidly. Then, as can be seen from the graph, using the correct information agents 
were able to find their way to an exit very quickly. 
6   Conclusion  
In this paper a first step is made towards an integrated approach for modeling and 
analysis of complex socio-technical systems. Specifically, a formal generic agent 
model has been proposed with explicitly defined relations between cognitive proc-
esses that influence the agent’s decision making and behavior. Such relations remain 
implicit in other existing agent-based models. Similarly to [8], cognitive states in the 
model are assumed to be emotionally loaded. The model has a high complexity. To 
address this issue, in the future model abstraction mechanisms will be developed. 
Furthermore, techniques for establishing relations between local dynamics of agents 
and global system properties will be developed in the future. The model will be vali-
dated in a large-scale case study in the frames of the SOCIONICAL project. 
 
Acknowledgments. This work is supported under the FP7 ICT Future Enabling 
Technologies programme of the European Commission under grant agreement No 
231288 (SOCIONICAL). 
References 
1. Bosse, T., Jonker, C.M., van der Meij, L., Treur, J.: A Language and Environment for 
Analysis of Dynamics by Simulation. Int. J. of AI Tools 16, 435–464 (2007) 
2. Damasio, A.: The Feeling of What Happens. In: Body and Emotion in the Making of Con-
sciousness. Harcourt Brace, New York (1999) 
3. Davidson, R., Scherer, K.R., Goldsmith, H. (eds.): Handbook of Affective Sciences. Oxford 
University, New York (2003) 
4. Edland, A., Svenson, O.: Judgment and decision making under time pressure. In: Svenson, 
O., Maule, A.J. (eds.) Time Pressure and Stress in Human Judgment and Decision Making, 
pp. 27–40. Plenum Press, New York (1993) 
5. Hebb, D.O.: The Organisation of Behavior. Wiley, New York (1949) 
6. Jain, L.C., Nguyen, N.T. (eds.): Knowledge Processing and Decision Making in Agent-
based Systems. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
7. Janis, I., Mann, L.: Decision making: A psychological analysis of conflict, choice, and com-
mitment. The Free Press, New York (1977) 
8. Memon, Z.A., Treur, J.: Learning to Believe by Feeling: an Agent Model for an Emergent 
Effect of Feelings on Beliefs. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Neural 
Networks, ISNN 2010. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg (2010)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 272–281, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Aggregated Information Representation for Technical 
Analysis on Stock Market with Csiszár Divergence 
Ryszard Szupiluk1,2, Piotr Wojewnik1,2, and Tomasz Ząbkowski1,3 
1 Polska Telefonia Cyfrowa Ltd, Al. Jerozolimskie 181, 02-222 Warsaw, Poland 
2 Warsaw School of Economics, Al. Niepodleglosci 162, 02-554 Warsaw, Poland  
3 Warsaw University of Life Sciences, Nowoursynowska 159, 02-787 Warsaw, Poland 
{rszupiluk,pwojewnik,tzabkowski}@era.pl 
Abstract. The paper presents a new method for multidimensional representa-
tion of financial information in the context of technical analysis. Typically, 
technical analysis of given financial instrument does not take into account 
a broader view on the market. We want to analyze the information about the 
environment of the primary instrument. Hence, there is the problem of the re-
sults synthesis in a coherent and a transparent way. In this paper we propose 
aggregation of the information from different sources into a single aggregate 
graph which enables a technical analysis. The complete information is obtained 
with the p-norms approach. To assess the impact of particular information on 
the primary instrument we applied divergence measures such as Csiszár diver-
gence and Beta divergence. Practical experiment on the stock exchange data 
confirmed the validity of proposed approach.  
Keywords: information representation, data transformation, technical analysis. 
1   Introduction 
Technical analysis is one of the standard methods of analysis on financial markets. 
Regardless of the controversy concerning technical analysis, both on scientific and 
philosophical aspects, the fact is that it is widely used [7,15,18]. Moreover, the litera-
ture gives plenty examples of successful investment strategies based on technical 
analysis [21,22,23].  
In this study we treat technical analysis as a special issue of searching for patterns 
where the main elements of a graphical analysis are the price and the volume of the 
securities [11,15]. In this approach the most problematic issue is the synthesis of in-
formation from the other relevant instruments such as the price of the securities, the 
industry branch of the company and the market index assigned. The article will pre-
sent a method of multidimensional transformation for information representation that 
is adequate for the standard technical analysis. 
The main advantage of analyzing the aggregated data in a single chart is the sim-
plicity of the decision making process. It is convenient to synthesize the information 
at the data preparation step  rather than drawing the conclusion based on separate 
analysis of given financial instruments (often giving inconsistent signals).

Aggregated Information Representation for Technical Analysis on Stock Market 273 
This concept seems to be particularly important in modeling behavior of financial 
markets as well as in formulating the investment systems. In particular, it can be  
applied to the automated trading systems which are based on artificial intelligence, 
neural networks, agent and multi-agent systems, and basically everywhere where the 
information representation plays an important role [8,9,12,13].  
2   Problem Formulation 
Technical analysis is a technique for forecasting the future direction of stock prices 
through the study of historical data. Typical input data for technical analysis are the 
price and the volume of the securities. The most popular approaches to technical 
analysis are: the analysis of indicators and average values, graphical inspections of the 
formations and trends, Elliott’s waves analysis or Fibonacci numbers approach 
[15,17,19]. By default, these methods are addressed to a single stock and are based on 
the assumption that the current stock price is the result of having comprehensive  
information about the market.  
The practice of stock exchange investments, however, shows that it is appropriate 
to take into account the broader market context [16]. Under the assumption that there 
are no unusual circumstances, the stock prices rarely behave separately from the in-
dustry to which it belongs to, or the market considered (eg. small, medium or large 
companies indexes). Hence, the present studies stress the need of the cross market 
analysis taking into account the different markets and major indices. The problem 
here is to synthesize the information from the different instruments. Having distin-
guished given formations on the certain markets it is difficult to aggregate them in a 
coherent and a transparent way.  
Input data averaging for the stock prices and volumes does not seem to be a good 
approach. It is rather simplistic approach and it narrows the cognition process.  
Assuming that stock prices are presented in a multidimensional space where the axis 
represents the prices of given shares, the simple average assigns a Manhattan metric 
to each point. It is relatively easy to compute, however, it is hard to justify its superi-
ority over the most popular and natural, in human perception, Euclidean metric. 
Another issue is the relationship between analyzed instruments and the implica-
tions of this analysis on aggregate information. Standard analysis of dependencies 
between the data accustoms a kind of symmet ry that results in adopting symmetrical 
mathematical characteristics, such as p-norm s, or correlations. Such a perception is 
highly established by the analysis and cognition process of physical and technical 
phenomena. Still, it is an open question whether such an approach is always correct in 
the context of social and economic problems.  For example, if a statement that CEZ's 
share price (on Polish market) followed the global market as represented by the 
S&P500 is true, then the finding that the S&P500 follows the company CEZ is mean-
ingless. However, the standard dependency measures based on correlation and norms 
do not distinguish the point of view. Taking into account the asymmetry of percep-
tion, instead of symmetric distance measures , it enables application of the approach 
based on divergence functions. In the context of these considerations, we separate the 
primary instrument from those additional. Basic instrument is treated as a reference 
point in the measures of divergence.

274 R. Szupiluk, P. Wojewnik, and T. Z ąbkowski 
Given the above considerations, our goal is to aggregate the stock price and vol-
ume information at various multi-dimensional metric spaces and to estimate the  
impact of additional instruments on the primary instrument. 
3   Information Aggregation 
The aggregation of the data related to financial instruments values is performed with 
transformation in the phase space. In this space each point represents values of the all 
the instruments analyzed. The main aggr egation process and instruments inter-
influence can be treated as information ex ploration from the relations between points 
and coordinate system.  We can also note the important fact that we only process the 
price and the volume of given share or index – what means that we have only non-
negative data.  
Let )(txi  be the value of the i-th instrument in time t, where Ki ,...,1= ,  Nt ,...,1= . 
Then the aggregated value can be described as 
pK txtxtxt )](),...,(),([)( 21=y , (1) 
where the p-norm px  for vector ],...,,[ 21 Kxxx=x  is defined as 
pK
i
p
ip x
1
1
|| ⎟⎠
⎞⎜⎝
⎛= ∑
=
x
. 
(2) 
Depending on the value of p parameter we get: 
− p = 1 - Manhattan norm, 
− p = 2 - Euclidean norm, 
− p =  ∞ - Chebyshev norm. 
Note that for p=1 we obtain the aggregation that is related to average (accurately to 
scaling factor). The above process can be illu strated as in Figure 1. We can see that 
we have system where input data are particular instrument prices, next we make a 
transformation to the phase space where the lo cation of each point is determined by 
the prices of the instruments Kxxx ,...,, 21 . Finally we get the distance Y of other 
points from the reference point, eg. the space origin. In the same way we can trans-
form the instrument volume.   
The main issue which arises here with respect to the above-mentioned method of  
aggregation is the equal participation of all the financial instruments in the result. For 
aggregation of more variables (instruments) the information about the primary share we 
want to predict is then blurred. The solution here is to apply a weighted aggregation: 
pKK txwtxwtxwt )](),...,(),([)( 2211=y . (3) 
 
However, the problem of selecting weights appears. We can use the subjective and 
intuitive approach or try to objectify it by analyzing the dependencies and relationships 
between aggregated variables. Subjective approach, although justified on Bayesian

Aggregated Information Representation for Technical Analysis on Stock Market 275 
 
Fig. 1. The process of information aggregation 
background [10], will not be considered. We try to find more objective and measurable 
method which can be applied to automatics systems. This brings us to the analysis of 
dependencies between variables. 
With the assumption that the values of the weights are the result of dependency 
analysis among the instruments, we will focus here on the possible methods to apply. 
3.1   Correlation Analysis 
In the most general sense the correlation measures the dependency between two vari-
ables. Because the variable values are colle cted in the vector form we can say the 
variables are interdependent, if these vectors have common direction. Thus, the angle 
between the centered vectors might be used to analyze the variables interdependency. 
The formula for the Euclidean space is empl oyed directly in the Pearson correlation 
coefficient. So the algebraic formula is used for probabilistic entities. Although the 
calculation of the correlation coefficient is quite simple it is not obvious how to  
analyze the effect in probabilistic sense. In practice, the resulting value might be unin-
terpretable. In fact, we can find three obstacles in proper interpretation of the value 
obtained from Pearson formula. These barriers include: delays, nonlinearities and 
nonstationarity [3,20,24]. 
More or less consciously we expect the correlation to present the interdependencies 
in every possible dimension. Whereas, there are domains, where the Pearson coeffi-
cient does not reveal the real relation. One of them is time. If the relation is shifted in 
Y

276 R. Szupiluk, P. Wojewnik, and T. Z ąbkowski 
time, the simple correlation analysis is not enough, because it might present lack of 
dependency. It has to be extended to cross-correlation, where the set of correlations is 
calculated successively as one of the vectors is delayed in comparison to the second 
vector. The cross-correlation function would expose the dynamic structure of the 
dependency. 
The second problem of measuring the inte rdependency with the correlation coeffi-
cient considers the interdependence form. If the variables are inter-reliant but the form 
is non-linear, the Pearson correlation close to zero says nothing about it. We have to 
linearize the dependency and then we could employ the correlation. The approach has 
two drawbacks. We have to know in advance what is the dependency form (and actu-
ally know the solution) or we have to find it (e.g. graphically), what is impossible in 
four and more-dimensional space.  
The third problem is related to definition of the Pearson coefficient. It is said to 
measure the dependency between random variables. This fact makes impossible to 
compare most time series where we can observe the stochastic trends. Stochastic trend 
informs on nonstationarity that means the values are generated from a set of random 
variables and not from the one variable. Moreover, the set is not generic and in some 
other run it could give quite opposite trends and conclusions. 
The presented features of the correlation show that it is not universal tool of inter-
dependency analysis. Therefore, with respect to its popularity we do not recommend 
the correlation for the interdependency analysis in the sense presented in this paper. 
3.2   Metric Analysis 
The measure of the distance between the instruments can be based on the mathemati-
cal norms. Given two instruments, x1=[x1(t)] and x2=[x1(t)], Nt ,...,1= , we can meas-
ure the distance with the p-norm: 
pN
i
p
p ixixxx
1
1
2121 |)()(| ⎟⎠
⎞⎜⎝
⎛ −=− ∑
=
. (4) 
The advantage of this approach is a computational simplicity and smart form of 
mathematical description. However, in terms of flexibility and versatility of the ana-
lyzed problem we will rather rely on more general measures of divergence where p-
norms is a special case of some divergence measure[5,14]. 
3.3   Divergence Analysis  
The discussion about dependencies between the data on financial instruments seems 
to be reasonable and comfortable if we consider them in terms of their similarities 
rather than distance. This also seems to be more related to human perception process. 
Comparing the share prices on the chart we generally perceive them in terms  
of (dis)similarity and not the remoteness of them. Looking for the mathematical de-
scription of this perception we assign some weights to the instruments before the 
aggregation what leads to divergence analysis. 
To obtain values of weights a large number of generalized and flexible divergences 
or similarity distances between two nonnegative sequences or patterns can be

Aggregated Information Representation for Technical Analysis on Stock Market 277 
proposed [1,2,4-6,14]. A divergence function )||( zyD  between two variables z and y 
fulfilling the following condition 0)||( ≥zyD  and 0 )||( =zyD  if zy =  but can not 
necessarily satisfy the triangular inequality ) ||()||()||( zxDxyDzyD +≤ . Such diver-
gences function are usually used in a manifold of probability distributions but can be 
also used for general data analysis [5]. For our problem we focus on the very flexible 
Csiszár divergence[4,5,6]. It is defined as  
∑
= ⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛=
N
t
c
tz
tyyzD
1 )(
)()||( ϕ , (5) 
where 0≥ix , 0≥iy  and )(zϕ  is the function ),(),0[ ∞−∞→∞  which  is convex on 
),0( ∞  and continuous at zero. The divergence function (5) under some additional 
restriction that 0)1( =ϕ  and strict convexity at 1 can be used as distance measure with 
several special cases: 
a) if ()
2
1)( −= uuϕ  then we obtain Hellinger distance  
()∑
=
−=
N
t
H tytzyzD
1
2
)()()||( , (6) 
b) if ()
2
1)( −= uuϕ  then we obtain Pearson’s distance  
()∑
=
−=
N
t
P
tz
tytzyzD
1
2
)(
)()()||( , (7) 
c) if ()
δδδϕ
δ uuuu −+−
−=
− 11)( 2
1
 , where  2/)1( αδ +=  then we obtain family of  
Amari’s alpha divergences: 
∑
=
−
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛ −+⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
−⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−=
N
t
tytz
tz
tytyyzD
1
1
)()(1)(
)(
)1(
)()||( δδδ
δ
α . (8) 
In particular, measure (8) for parameter 2=δ  would be the Pearson’s distance, for 
5.0=δ  - the Hellinger distance, for 1−=δ  - the Neyman’s chi-square distance, for 
1→δ  we obtain generalized Kullback-Leibler divergence (9): 
∑
= ⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛ −+=
N
t
GKL tztyty
z
tzyzD
i
1
)()()(ln)()||( , (9) 
and finally for 0→δ we obtain dual generalized Kullback-Leibler divergence: 
∑
= ⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛ −+=
N
t
DGKL tytztz
ytyyzD i
1
)()()(ln)()||( . (10) 
Concluding, divergence mesasures enable calculation of the similarity between the 
instruments and they will be employed in calculation of the instruments weights.

278 R. Szupiluk, P. Wojewnik, and T. Z ąbkowski 
3.4   Weight Calculation 
The aggregation process presented in the paper aims to join the behavior of analyzed 
instrument and its environment. But the environment can be presented from two per-
spectives: similar or contrasting to the primary instrument. The first approach can be 
materialized by adding more weights to the instruments which are close to primary 
instrument, and diminishing the impact of the others:  
∑
=
+ = K
j
j
i
i
yzD
yzDw
1
1
)||(
)||( . (11) 
In the second case we can give more weight to the instruments that are highly  
different to primary basic instrument: 
∑
=
+ = K
j j
i
i
yzD
yzDw
1
1
)||(1
)||(1
. (12) 
Let us note z stands for the analyzed instrument ( w1=1) and yi – for the environ-
mental variables, where i=1,…, K.  
4   Practical Experiment 
To present the capabilities of proposed approach we make simple technical analysis 
for JWConstruction (JWC) – real estate developer at Warsaw Stock Exchange.  
 
 
Fig. 2. The Figure E presents the closing price of the analyzed stock. The Figures A-D show he 
behavior of the environment: branch and stock market indices. The Figure F presents the  
aggregated value.

Aggregated Information Representation for Technical Analysis on Stock Market 279 
 
Fig. 3. The stock price (E), and the aggregated value (F) for day:150:300 
 
Fig. 4.  The Figure E presents the volume of the analyzed stock. The Figures A-D show he 
behavior of the environment: branch and stock market indices. The Figure F presents the  
volume aggregated with weights from Csiszár divergence. 
The data are from 1st March 2008 to 30th September 2009. The scaled price of the  
share and the environment variables like WIG20, MWIG40, SWIG-80 and WIG-
Development are shown in Fig. 2A-E. To obtain aggregated information we calculate 
weights from the divergence between normalized indices and the JWC prices with 
Helliger distance. The aggregated process in 5D space is performed with Euclidean 
norm (p=2), see Fig. 2F.  
In Fig. 3E we can observe the period from days 150 to 300. We can see at the day 
205 the share price reaches some local minimum, but it does not start the new move 
from there. The real move begins at the day 245 and it is confirmed by the aggregated 
value in Fig. 3F. The aggregated information enables avoiding the false buy signal 
generated by trend analyses as well as such indicators as MACD, RSI or system based 
on moving averages. 
The volumes of analyzed instruments are presented in Fig.4. There we can observe 
the effect of aggregation with Pearson distance.

280 R. Szupiluk, P. Wojewnik, and T. Z ąbkowski 
5   Conclusions 
The uniform representation of the multivariate information that comes from different 
market instruments enables to perform the one coherent financial analysis. To obtain 
final results we should answer the two questions: how to calculate the mutual depend-
ences between different financial instruments and how to aggregate them. In our  
approach we use the distance derived from p-norm to calculate dependencies and  
the divergence concept for aggregation. In our opinion it is important to distinguish 
the operation that aggregates the information from the operation of mutual dependen-
cies and similarities recognition. The practical experiment with stock technical analy-
sis confirms validity of our methodology. Due to the limitations which are the size  
of the article and the methodological nature of the paper the experiment has the form 
of simple example and it aims to present the methodology of the multivariate informa-
tion representation.  
There are many open questions for further work. One of the most important is the 
problem of the optimal divergence form selection. For the moment we shall test dif-
ferent formulas from the divergence list presented in the paper.  
References 
1. Amari, S.: Diferential-Geometrical Methods in Statistics. Springer, Heidelberg (1985) 
2. Amari, S.: Information geometry of the EM and EM algorithms for neural networks. Neu-
ral Networks 8, 1379–1408 (1995) 
3. Anscombe, F.J.: Graphs in statistical analysis. The American Statistician 27, 17–21 (1973) 
4. Cichocki, A., Zdunek, R., Amari, S.: Csiszar’s Divergences for Non-Negative Matrix Fac-
torization: Family of New Algorithms. In: Ro sca, J.P., Erdogmus, D., Príncipe, J.C., 
Haykin, S. (eds.) ICA 2006. LNCS, vol. 3889, pp. 32–39. Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 
5. Cichocki, A., Zdunek, R., Phan, A.-H., Amari, S.: Nonnegative Matrix and Tensor Factori-
zations: Applications to Exploratory Multi-way Data Analysis. John Wiley, Chichester 
(2009) 
6. Csiszar, I.: Information measures: A critical survey. In: Prague Conference on Information 
Theory, vol. A, pp. 73–86. Academia Prague (1974) 
7. Fama, E.: Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work. The  
Journal of Finance 25(2), 383–417 (1970) 
8. Hellstrom, T.: ASTA - a Tool for Development of Stock Prediction Algorithms. Theory of 
Stochastic Processes 5(21), 22–32 (1999) 
9. Hellstrom, T., Holmstrom, K.: Parameter Tuni ng in Trading Algorithms Using ASTA.  
In: Computational Finace. MIT 3 Press, Cambridge (1999) 
10. Jaynes, E.T.: Probability theory the logic of science. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 
(2003) 
11. Kennedy, R.L., Lee, Y., Van Roy, B., Reed, C., Lippman, R.P. (eds.): Solving Data Min-
ing Problems with Pattern Recognition. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1997) 
12. Krutsinger, J.: Trading Systems: Secrets of the Masters. McGraw-Hill, New York (1997) 
13. Luo, Y., Davis, D., Liu, K.: A Multi-Agent Decision Support System for Stock Trading. 
The IEEE Network Magazine Special Issue on Enterprise Networking and Services 16(1) 
(2002) 
14. Minami, M., Eguchi, S.: Robust blind source separation by beta-divergence. Neural Com-
putation 14, 1859–1886 (2002)

Aggregated Information Representation for Technical Analysis on Stock Market 281 
15. Murphy, J.J.: Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. New York Institute of Finance 
(1999) 
16. Murphy, J.J.: Intermarket Analysis Profiting from Global Market Relationships. John 
Wiley & Sons Inc., Chichester (2004) 
17. Nison, S.: Japanese Candlestick Charting T echniques. New York Institute of Finance 
(1991) 
18. Peters, E.: Fractal Market Analysis: Applying Chaos Theory to Investment & Economics. 
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester (1994) 
19. Prechter, R., Frost, A.J.: Elliott Wave Principle: Key to Market Behavior. New Classics 
Library (1998) 
20. Rodgers, J.L., Nicewander, W.A.: Thirteen ways to look at the correlation coefficient. The 
American Statistician 42(1), 59–66 (1988) 
21. Schwager, J.: Stock Market Wizards: Interviews with America’s Top Stock Traders. 
Harper Paperbacks (1993) 
22. Schwager, J.: The New Market Wizards: Conv ersations with America’s Top Traders. 
Harper Paperbacks (1994) 
23. Sperandeo, V.: Trader Vic: Methods of a Wall Street Master. J. Wiley & Sons, Chichester 
(1993) 
24. Therrien, C.W.: Discrete Random Signals and Statistical Signal Processing. Prentice Hall, 
New Jersey (1992)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 282–291, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Implementation of Network Oriented  
Manufacturing Structures 
Marek Dudek1 and Paweł Pawlewski2 
1 AGH University of Science and Technology, ul. A. Mickiewicza 30,  
 30-059 Krakow, Poland 
mdudek@zarz.agh.edu.pl 
2 Poznan University Of Technology, ul.Strzeleckar. 11,  
60965 Poznan, Poland 
pawel.pawlewski@put.poznan.pl 
Abstract. The paper presents the results of the authors’ studies which consisted 
in implementation of network oriented manufacturing structures. New paradigm 
of modern (flexible/agile) production is sketched. The manufacturing systems 
and models are described. The manufacturing systems and their structures 
should be made from components (modules) occurring in various organizations, 
which are nodes of a cooperation network. Creating the structure for the  
specific conditions and parameters of flow is only possible if the best organiza-
tion of flow can be selected. This can be determined with use of simulation 
modeling. Such modern structural systems supported by appropriate software 
are often called e-manufacturing. The results of researches performed in 15  
enterprises are presented in paper. Basic components and additional key tools 
for the proper functioning of e-manufacturing are identified. Finally the conclu-
sions and proposition of integration organized in the form of e-manufacturing is 
presented. 
Keywords: network manufacturing structures, flow simulations, e-manufacturing. 
1   Introduction 
Manufacturing environment has come under more pressure. Customer demand shorter 
lead times and a higher product variety. Transforming the structures of manufacturing 
systems comes out of the need for conformity to the present and foreseen market 
conditions. There are many factors which affect the necessity for change: 
- turbulent environment, 
- process variety, 
- technologically oriented basic strategies, 
- life-cycle thinking, 
- time compressing, 
- event-impulse management approach, 
- subdivide large, complex structures into smaller, 
- combination of different production techniques during production, etc.

Implementation of Network Oriented Manufacturing Structures 283 
The basic production paradigm is still changing. One basic manufacturing model is 
replaced by another. According to their intensity, changes can be distinguished into 
constant-evolutionary changes or abrupt-revolutionary changes. The evolutionary 
change is a modification of the present syst em into a continuous adaptation process. 
Revolutionary changes are radical changes of the current system (they are often in-
duced by the existence of drastic problem situations). It is possible to sketch a new 
paradigm of modern (flexible / agile) production with the following points [1]: 
- improvement of three broad cross-functional factors (quality, cost, time), 
- satisfaction of customers by increasing customer-perceived value of products and 
controlling process to produce quality at the source: customer responsiveness, 
- continuous improvement between bolder innovation phases, 
- workers at the operations level are empowered through working in various types of 
teams, including self-organizing and self-directed work groups, 
- suppliers are chosen carefully, with a view to fostering long-term relations with the 
company, 
- the organizations appears as an open system in search of harmonious relations with 
its environment, 
- technological choices are linked to the co rporate strategy and are closely coordi-
nated with organizational changes to allow the workforce to adopt to the fluctuations 
of production and other processes, 
- performance evaluation at spurring and sustaining both innovation and continuous 
improvement. 
The aim of the paper is to present the results of the authors’ researches which con-
sisted in implementation of network oriented manufacturing structures. The article 
consists of four sections, the second of which presents the literature overview of net-
work oriented manufacturing structures. The third one describes E-manufacturing, its 
definition and components. The main contribution of this paper which consisted on 
presentation results performed in 15 enterprises is enclosed in section four. This  
section is formed by definition stages of implementation, simulation modeling of 
manufacturing structures and principles orf integrating the network by means of  
e-manufacturing. The fifth section depicts conclusions and proposition of integration 
organized in the form of e-manufacturing. 
2   Network Oriented Manufacturing Structures 
The structure of a manufacturing system should allow its flexibility. Elasticity of mod-
ern manufacturing systems should give the possibility for activities reflecting an  
individual customer’s demand. It can be achieved by the possibility of creating 
changeable configurations of a manufacturing system. Manufacturing systems with 
such a configuration can adapt to changes in the environment (new products, new 
processes, new technologies new structures, etc.). They are open to changes, as well as 
flexible in reactions to adaptation to these changes. The possibility for adaptation to 
new conditions increases by creating new external cooperation between components 
from different production systems. Adaptation skills can be secured by a modular 
structure which gives flexibility by changes of cooperation structure. Manufacturing 
systems which have the texture of a modular structure can be called adaptation

284 M. Dudek and P. Pawlewski 
systems. Adaptation manufacturing systems are process structures with elastic produc-
tion teams which adapt to a given situation. These are logic dynamic production struc-
tures. These are collections of components carrying out following phases of the process 
and connected by a network of cooperation. The cooperation defines where a given 
fragment of a production process is to be placed, in what time and amount. 
Contemporary manufacturing systems should adapt better to changeable demands 
because they will tend to operate in changeable environment. Their structures must be 
able to change dynamically so as to ad apt the production capacity to given needs. 
Organizing the production for defined circumstances and parameters of flow will be 
possible when, in each situation, it will be possible to choose the best way of flow. 
Such a way of flow can be chosen when branched off structures of internal and exter-
nal cooperation are organized. Designing and organizing the manufacturing system 
will resolve into creating a network of connections, where modules (components) of 
the manufacturing system will be joints of network. The network is understood as a 
structure of modules cooperation, for cooperation relations which are in manufactur-
ing processes create an integrated network of connections. The network configuration 
must connect the components (modules) originating from different structures and 
parameters (operations, production techniques, production capacity). Network struc-
tures facilitate many forms of flows depending on the adopted kind of cooperation. 
Table 1 presents various organizational approaches which apply new organization 
forms in order to enhance the structure flexibility. 
Table 1. The selected contemporary manufacturing systems and models 
OAMS 
(Open Architecture  
Manufacturing System) 
NGMS 
(Next Generation Manufacturing 
System) 
SOPS 
(Self Organizing Production 
System) 
EFM 
(Environment Friendly 
Manufacturing) 
GM 
(Green Manufacturing) 
IMS 
(Intelligence Manufacturing 
System) 
FMS 
(Flexible Manufacturing 
System) 
GMS 
(Global Manufacturing System) 
CIMS 
(Computer Integrated  
Manufacturing System) 
CM 
(Collaborative 
 Manufacturing) 
VM 
(Virtual Manufacturing) 
HMS 
(Holonic Manufacturing 
System) 
BMS 
(Biological Manufacturing 
System) 
MAMS 
(Multi Agent Manufacturing 
System) 
RMS 
(Reconfigurable  
Manufacturing System) 
RM 
(Remote Manufacturing) 
CHM 
(Chaos Manufacturing) 
ABM 
(Agent Based 
Manufacturing) 
LP 
(Lean Production) 
AM 
(Agile Manufacturing) 
FE 
(Fractal Enterprise) 
 
Some of the above manufacturing systems and production models have been 
maturely applied to practical manufacturing areas, some are still undergoing investi-
gation or conceptualization [2] . 
The presented concepts and models of organizing manufacturing systems are the 
foundation of creating manufacturing systems, which ought to provide operational

Implementation of Network Oriented Manufacturing Structures 285 
and structural flexibility. Each of these concepts is characterized by a network struc-
ture of cooperating units, modules. The selection of a specific organization variant 
depends upon numerous factors, such as: 
- goal of a system operation and its strategy 
- resources availability 
- mobility, friendliness, calibration ability of a system 
- organizational knowledge as for the organization, implementation, evaluation of 
probable structural systems 
- technical capacity for adaptation changes  
- complexity of production techniques necessary to execute an order 
- potential of prospective cooperating parties 
Therefore, one cannot explicitly say which of  the presented concepts is the best.  
The new forms of organizing manufacturing structures, such as segmented, fractal, 
holonic, bionic, modular factory, make it possible for an enterprise to be changeable, 
productive and increase the level of adaptability. It is possible through decentraliza-
tion and increasing the independence of basic manufacturing elements. Even though 
these approaches have certain similarities, each of them seeks to increase organiza-
tional autonomy. A common idea of all the a pproaches is to esta blish decentralized 
units on the factory level, called segments, fractals, holons, agents, etc., in order to be 
able to subdivide a complex system into smaller organizational units.  
The organization of flows in network structures has to be distinguished from the 
organization of conventional flows. The differences have to be precisely defined in 
order to avoid ambiguous misunderstandings and result from the form of the structure. 
Conventional organizational units, such as manufacturing cells and manufacturing 
groups are basically the result of a production planning activity. Organizational units 
are created to subdivide large, complex struct ures into smaller, manageable units with 
the purpose of an increased autonomy, transparency and efficiency. Contemporary 
organizational units (based on network struct ures) are designed to assign processes to 
a physically separated formation without aff ecting other units. Strategic aims of net-
work structures are to increase the overall company value, minimize waste, reduce 
organizational complexity and meet customer expectations (needs). Network oriented 
thinking allows designing optimal structures for present requirements. 
3   E-Manufacturing – The Form of Networks Organizing 
The network organization of flows makes it possible to apply solutions based on e-
manufacturing. E-manufacturing is a combination of separate components of systems, 
following the determined production path in order to execute assigned tasks as fast 
and cheaply as possible [3]. The implementation of e-manufacturing principles means 
the necessity to exhibit the company’s own internal systems (resources, knowledge, 
technologies, etc.) and to make them available to cooperating parties. Such actions 
induce obligatory release of auxiliary and major activities, which in practice means 
making the organizational knowledge public. Therefore, e-manufacturing is the kind 
of organizing which, with use of appropriate tools, will integrate the internal and 
external components of various organizations into one manufacturing system. One

286 M. Dudek and P. Pawlewski 
should remember that it is not the availability of components which is an organiza-
tional problem (they are available in the environment), but identifying them and unit-
ing into one efficiently working system. 
E-manufacturing, which includes all the aspects of manufacturing, i.e. sale, market-
ing, customer service, creating new products, supply, logistics and manufacturing 
itself, should integrate actions of a single system with other parts of a chain  
(network). This may bring numerous profits [4], such as fast acquisition of feedback 
information, costs reduction, improved  communication, sharing knowledge and  
information, stock reduction in the delivery chain, improved efficiency and effective-
ness, harmonized and standardized procedures, improved customer service. 
E-manufacturing can also be defined as collaboration systems with numerous  
external links, using IT solutions in order to integrate with the environment [5]. The 
term can also be used for such a form of organizing the manufacturing system struc-
ture, which uses advanced IT solutions in order to make real-time decisions which are 
purposed to determine the mode of organization, the principles of module selection 
and configuration and the indispensable resources. E-manufacturing guarantees in-
formation exchange between all the cooperating parties. The information, experience, 
knowledge are exchanged via appropriate module relations with use of the Internet. 
Therefore, these are the forms that play the role of integrators which lay out paths for 
cooperation, which can possibly be implemented (internal and external ones). Artifi-
cial Intelligence (AI) is the tool for inferring: AI will plan, coordinate and create the 
courses of implemented processes in the distributed systems. AI will be able to make 
real-time decisions as for the distribution and implementation of tasks. As a result, the 
decision-making nodes will be transformed into automatic-information-processing 
nodes, which means that e.g. interpersonal relation will be replaced by network links 
between computerised modules. All the system functions will be solely performed by 
electronic equipment (with no human intervention).  
4   Research of Implementation of Network Oriented Structures 
Organizing modern structures of manufacturing systems (components and their recip-
rocal relations), one should take into c onsideration both time and space links of  
particular components because it is possible to shape a given structure of system only 
when all partial processes undergoing within the system will be considered as a whole 
in integrated manufacturing process. Also, the structure of system needs to be seen as 
a process of flow in time and space,  i.e.  [5] streams of flows and their volume, ways 
of flow and their structure, phases of activity and their time dependence. The above-
mentioned components of flow determine the structure of a production system i.e. a 
number of components and their space location. Foreseeing different flows of proc-
esses in the production system allows to define the most flexible structure. The inves-
tigation of changeability of tasks in time allows also to calculate the number of the 
system components and their distribution. While organizing the structure, one should 
take into consideration both the course an d structure of the integrated manufacturing 
process, as well as mutual dependences of processes in the network, often and often 
going beyond the area of manufacturing system (lack of visible system boundaries, 
where changeability of tasks results in the fact that environment becomes a system).

Implementation of Network Oriented Manufacturing Structures 287 
Investigations aiming at verifying the suggested methodology of structure modelling 
were conducted with use of manufacturing system model. The model was created and 
verified on the basis of investigations and analyses carried out in fifteen electrical en-
gineering industry enterprises in the south of Poland. Electrical engineering industry is 
one of the best developed branches of Polish industry. The courses of manufacturing 
processes in this industry are characterized by the greatest technical diversity and can 
be representative of other branches of industry products. That is why, selecting electri-
cal engineering industry as a subject of the research appears to be correct. Moreover, 
products made by this branch of industry are marked by great structural complexity, 
multistage production process, variety of flows, diversity of the type and scale of  
production with a changeable product line.  
4.1   Stages of Implementation  
The concept of putting manufacturing structures into economic practice can be pre-
sented regardless of the choice of organization form, which will be the basis of con-
structing these structures. The concept includes eight stages, shown in Figure 1. 
 
Fig. 1. Stages of implementing network structures 
At the first stage, the analysis of the current structural solution is made in order to 
identify the strengths and weaknesses of the existing solution and to map all the flows 
occurring in the system. The second stage is the stage of identifying market require-
ments as for the introduction of a new structural system. At the third stage, the  
requirements to be met by the new solution are confronted with the present structure 
potential. At this stage, there is a question whether the target solution will be achieved 
with use of a company’s own resources (if yes, what they will be) or what external 
sources should be used. The fourth stage is  the stage of confronting the selected  
solution with the well-known and used-in-the-market concepts. In case when similar 
solutions occur in the market, the available knowledge can be copied. Yet, creating a

288 M. Dudek and P. Pawlewski 
solution which will be innovative in the market seems to be a better idea. At the fifth 
stage, the necessary resources are chosen and complemented so as to create the se-
lected system and determine principles of cooperation between units (modules). At 
the sixth stage, the potential organizational variants are simulated. At the seventh 
stage, the potential systems are selected with use of appropriate criteria and the most 
effective solution, considering the given conditions, is chosen. The eighth stage is 
especially noteworthy since at this stage a number of actions are taken, which lead to 
the implementation of e-manufacturing[6]. 
4.2   Simulation Modeling of Manufacturing Structures  
The sixth stage is critical for implementing the most effective structural solution. It is 
impossible to take into account all the potential process combinations without using 
appropriate tools, such as, e.g. simulation modelling. The usefulness of simulation 
modelling to solving similar problems is often described in literature, e.g. [7]. The 
modern approach to modelling the structure of system should be based upon deter-
mining the principles of flow and components cooperation. The principles may be as 
follows: deadline for executing the whole task, deadlines for intermediate stages, 
intensity of flows (parallelism, multiflux), scheduling of tasks. Therefore, modelling 
modern structures consists of [8]:  
- searching for cooperating parties 
- determining potential networks, cooperative relations 
- selecting the most efficient courses 
The conducted research made it possible to determine the basic characteristics of an 
average investigated manufacturing system (Figures 2 and 3): 
- an average volume of production in the investigated period and an average number 
of operations per product, 
- average time and cost of manufacturing one product 
 
Histogram (wlkprod 5v*102c)
-2000 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
gn1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
No of obs
Histogram (wlkprod 2v*29c)
NewVar = 22*1*normal(x; 4,0909; 1,342)
234567
NewVar
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
No of obs
 
Fig. 2. Volume of production and number of operations in products

Implementation of Network Oriented Manufacturing Structures 289 
Histogram (Spreadsheet1 10v*55c)
Var2 = 55*1*normal(x; 4,9185; 2,0345)
0123456789 1 0
Var2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
No of obs
Histogram (Spreadsheet1 10v*55c)
Var2 = 55*20*normal(x; 75,7621; 41,2291)
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Var2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
No of obs
 
Fig. 3. Average time and cost of manufacturing one product 
The main principle of modelling the manufacturing structure in a given situation 
was the deadline for implementing the tasks imposed by a customer. The analysis 
showed that it is possible to create alternative manufacturing paths, that use resources 
of various organizations under investigation (e-manufacturing). At first, the plan was 
implemented on the basis of one organization’s resources and the basic characteristics 
of the manufacturing process were determined (time, cost, productivity etc.). In the 
course of subsequent experiments, the most time- and cost-consuming operations 
were assigned for implementation to the investigated organization. On the foundation 
of knowledge base, fifty hypothetical configurations of manufacturing structures were 
created so as to execute the appointed production plan; the calculations were  
made with use of Witness software. The simulation allows to determine the basic 
parameters of the processes that form the structure of the manufacturing system. The 
investigated parameters were time and cost. The experiments lead to the preliminary 
conclusions; as the number of operations assigned to cooperating parties grows 
- the time and cost of implementing the set production increase 
- in case the time and cost of transport are not taken into consideration, the total time 
and cost of production decrease 
- amount of time devoted to control increases 
- there is a shift in the occurrence of bottlenecks 
- the structural elasticity increases.  
Moreover, in spite of times losses caused by the external transport, contracting critical 
operations to cooperating parties in many cases led to the prompt execution of tasks.  
4.3   Integrating the Network by Means of E-Manufacturing  
According to studies on e-manufacturing, its basic components are [9] Manufacturing 
Execution System, Equipment Engineering System, Supply Chain Management and 
Engineering Chain Management. As a result of research made by the authors in 15 
enterprises, additional key tools were identified; they are indispensible for the proper 
functioning of e-manufacturing. Hence, it also necessary to:

290 M. Dudek and P. Pawlewski 
- construct knowledge base, i.e. a tool for continuous acquisition of information on 
suppliers and their offer, possible cooperating parties and their potential as well as 
production capacity, possibilities and terms of cooperation, 
- develop tools for identification and current analysis of resources, which makes it 
possible to verify production resources in real time, and to determine the most effi-
cient manufacturing paths (simulation), 
- develop mechanisms of relationship management in the network, 
- develop negotiation tools in the network, 
- develop tools for evaluating confidence in cooperating parties, 
- develop tools for integration in the network, in the form of universal applications 
able to reduce the operating costs of the infrastructure, and ready to cooperate with IT 
systems of other networks.  
Implementing solutions based on e-manufacturing structures [10] will result in a sig-
nificant increase in efficiency and effectiveness of manufacturing. It will also expand 
the data accessibility so as to support making a decision, and it will identify knowl-
edge in the system, which can later be the foundation of the knowledge base.  
Moreover, it will generate and facilitate tools and applications used in the decision-
making process, expand the control over resources and equipment, thoroughly secure 
communication channels, create standards of communication and terminology,  
synchronize data in real time and integrate various links of manufacturing process.  
5   Conclusions 
The conducted experiments lead to the following conclusions: 
- cheaper and shorter paths of executing tasks can be found in a network. 
- at the stage of constructing alternative paths of manufacturing, Artificial Intelligence 
can be substituted with simulation modelling, which is a cheaper solution. 
- model investigations make it possible to select the most effective way of implement-
ing a process (process map) for the given conditions. 
- the accessible knowledge base allows to analyse a huge number of potential cooper-
ating systems. 
- it is possible to implement the network forms of manufacturing structure, which are 
integrated by means of e-manufacturing. 
The analysis of the organization of production indicates that numerous enterprises, 
although provided with CAx computer assistance tools, are still separated from  
external business environment. The implementation of ERP or MES class systems 
guarantees only the internal integration of the system, and communication with the 
environment is developed with use of additional modules (e.g. CRM, SCM, LCM, 
EDI), which support manufacturing processes. E-manufacturing allows external ac-
cess by using appropriate software purposed for servicing manufacturing process. Due 
to the contemporary manufacturing conditions:  
- enterprises deal with global competitiveness (consignees demand competitive prod-
ucts, which reduce their manufacturing costs); 
- systems cannot elastically respond to customers’ demands, since their owns  
resources are limited;

Implementation of Network Oriented Manufacturing Structures 291 
- automation and outsourcing processes are much too slow in regard to market  
requirements; 
- not enough resources are allocated for increasing communicativeness between the 
system and environment.  
Therefore, it seems advisable to closely integrate the links of a supply chain. Such 
integration can be achieved with use of network manufacturing structures organized 
in the form of e-manufacturing.  
 
Acknowledgments. This work has been completed thanks to collaboration between 
Poznan University of Technology and AGH University of Science and Technology in 
Krakow. 
References 
1. Duguay, C.R., Landry, S., Pasin, F.: From mass production to flexible/agile production. 
Int. J. of Operation & Production Management 17(12), 1183–1195 (1997) 
2. Cheng, F.-T., Lin, C.T.: A Holonic Information Exchange Systems for e-Manufacturing. 
In: The 30th Annual Conference of The IEEE Industrial Electronic Society, pp. 2377–2382 
(2004) 
3. Lee, J.: E-manufacturing – fundamental, tools and transformation. Robotics and Computer 
Integrated Manufacturing 19, 501–507 (2003) 
4. Henbury, C.: E-Manufacturing,  
http://www.cheshirehenbury.com/emanufacturing 
5. Mazur, Z.: Formowanie procesów logistycznych w systemach wytwarzania. Wydawnictwo 
Wydziału Zarządzania AGH, Kraków (2003) 
6. Dudek, M.: E-wytwarzanie – nowoczesna forma organizacji procesów wytwarzania.  
In: Zimniewicz, K. (ed.) Instrumenty zarz ądzania we współczesnym przedsiębiorstwie – 
nowe kierunki. Zeszyty Naukowe UE w Poznaniu, vol. 129, pp. 149–157 (2009) 
7. Matuszek, J.: Inżynieria produkcji. Politechnika Lodzka, Bielsko Biala (2000) 
8. Moczała, A.: Uwarunkowania projektowania procesów produkcyjnych w warunkach koop-
eracji. Zarządzanie Przedsiębiorstwem 2, 46–54 (2004) 
9. Cheng, F.T.: IEES, http://www.sematech.org/meetings 
10. Wohlwend, H.: E-Manufacturing workshop,  
http://www.sematech.org/meetings

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 292–301, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Supply Chain Arrangements in Recovery Network  
Arkadiusz Kawa1 and Paulina Golinska2 
1 Poznań University of Economics, al. Niepodległości 10, 61-875 Poznan, Poland 
2 Poznan University of Technology, Strzelecka 11, 60-965 Poznan, Poland  
arkadiusz.kawa@ue.poznan.pl, paulina.golinska@put.poznan.pl 
Abstract. In the computer industry product’s life cycles are getting shorter 
every year, resulting in increasing number of used products that need to be re-
cycled or reused. In order to gain the advantages of “two-way” economy a 
change in business approach is needed. Configuration of the recovery network 
is a complex task due to the big number of relations between reverse supply 
chain participants. In practice, planning product renewal many weeks in ad-
vance is hardly effective as in dynamically changing conditions forecasts 
quickly become outdated. Authors proposed a model based on graph theory and 
agent technology that helps to solve this problem by dynamic configuration of 
supply chains. The simulation results based on proposed model are presented 
and discussed. 
Keywords: recovery network, recycling, reverse logistics, supply chain  
configuration, software agents, NetLogo. 
1   Introduction 
Growing concern of sustainability exerts huge pressure on companies to include used 
products in their supply network. Since 2005, member states of the European Union 
have begun implementing the WEEE Directive, which requires manufacturers to 
provide for recycling of electronic products and also households to use drop-off 
points for their unwanted electronic devices. In 2006, the EU and Japan implemented 
Restrictions on Hazardous Substances (RoHS), a regulation that limits the amounts of 
hazardous substances manufacturers may use in technology. China starts to follow 
with similar regulations in early 2007. 
Efficient reverse flows management allows to reduce the size of waste being 
disposed. The main goal is maximization of the reuse, recycling and remanufacturing 
of products. It allows also the minimization of the overall environmental impact of 
products and technology. Reverse processes start with all activities rendering used 
products available and physically moving them to the place of further treatment 
(collection). The inspection/separation denotes all operations determining whether a 
given product is in fact re-usable and in which way. It results in splitting the flow of 
used products according to distinct re-use an d disposal options [3]. Reprocessing may 
take different forms including recycling, repair and remanufacturing. In addition, 
activities such as cleaning, replacement and re-assembly may be involved. Re-
distribution includes all activities needed to  direct delivery of re-usable products to a

Supply Chain Arrangements in Recovery Network 293 
potential market. Sustainable supply chain management requires a continuous course 
of actions in order to decrease the environmental impact of products and technology 
used by a manufacturer and its pre-chain (suppliers) and post-chain (collection, 
inspection and reprocessing activities). In order to meet this goal the efficient 
configuration of recovery network is a must. 
In Europe manufacturers create the European Recycling Platform (ERP) to provide 
pan-European take-back and recycling services. In 2008, ERP recycled 29,000 tones 
of equipment on behalf of just Hewlett-Packard (HP), who is the leader in this sus-
tainable approach. In addition to ERP’s recycling, in 2008 HP conducted 23 European 
Union Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE) take-back 
events in seven countries, collecting 76 tones of unwanted IT equipments.  
Electronic equipment often contains heavy metals and other hazardous substances, 
and must be refurbished or recycled properly. E-waste contains harmful elements, 
including lead, cadmium, mercury, chromium and halogen-based flame retardants. 
Governments worldwide are stepping up environmental regulations. On the other side 
used IT equipment can be a source of valuable resources.  
A professional asset recovery program provides a good opportunity to find value in 
older equipment and to enhance the organization’s reputation for environmental 
friendly institution. Many organizations won’t require enough asset recovery work to 
justify developing the necessary specialized knowledge and skills. A better solution 
for them may be asset recovery outsourcing. Professional recovery companies have 
specialized skills: logistics (inventory control, transport, storage, etc.), data wiping, 
equipment refurbishment, resale and environmentally responsible recycling. 
1.1   Recovery Network in Computer Industry 
In the computer equipment industry product reuse programs extend the useful life of 
equipment, especially at the end of leasing agreements when customers return prod-
ucts. The equipment is refurbished or remanufactured as appropriate, repackaged and 
resold. Company offers remarketed products for most product types, and follows strict 
processes to protect user data and to meet environmental requirements.   
Products returned to manufacturer that are not suitable for reuse enter the recycling 
programs. Consumer recycling services vary by country, depending also on local 
regulations. Producers make arrangements with commercial customers depending on 
the equipment involved and the specific circumstances.  
The network presented in Figure 1 is characteristic for the recovery network in the 
computer industry. The organization of computer production is conducted by Original 
Equipment Manufacturers (OEM). Flagship Companies (FC) which own such makes 
as Dell, HP, Apple, Toshiba, Acer control the purchase of key elements for computers 
for OEM which, in turn, are responsible for buying from Vendors and so on [7]. 
1.2   Previous Work 
The configuration process is an arrangement of parts or elements that gives the whole 
its inherent form. The previous work on recovery network configuration has taken in 
consideration costs of investments or operational costs in order to find the fixed

294 A. Kawa and P. Golinska 
 
Fig. 1. The recovery network in the computer industry 
geographical location of new facilities/points for recovery and product collection [e.g. 
1, 5]. In the dynamic changing economic environment it is more important to focus on 
the changes in a system (supply chain) than on its total redesign. On account of a huge 
number of entities which can take part in a supply chain and the complexity of the 
relationships between them, the configuration process is multipronged and requires 
particular attention. 
A configurable network should be a self-adjusting and resilient system reacting to 
the changes taking place in its individual pa rts. In practice, pla nning product renewal 
many weeks in advance is hardly effective as in dynamically changing conditions 
forecasts quickly become outdated. That is why the information about the current 
network situation must be constantly updated and stored in a place accessible to all 
the interested parties.  
The paper is a continuation of work author’s presented at [6,7], regarding dy-
namic configuration of forward supply chain and agent based systems for closed loop 
logistics. Its structure is as follows, the proposed model is given in Section 2. The 
simulation experiment and its results are discussed in Section 3. Final conclusions are 
stated in Section 4.  
2   RSCA Model 
2.1   Graph Theory in Recovery Network 
The RSCA (Recovery Supply Chain Arrangement) is based on DyConSC model [7] 
and extended here with the recovery concept. It is mainly aimed at building dynamic 
and flexible temporary supply chains. Nowadays it is especially important because 
customer demand, production lines and distribution network frequently change. This 
model enables each entity of the supply chain to independently adjust their plans in 
such a way that they become optimal both within one enterprise and the whole supply 
chain. Such a supply chain may be successfully realized by agent oriented systems.

Supply Chain Arrangements in Recovery Network 295 
In the RSCA model four tiers of enterprises and one tier (represented by custom-
ers) have been distinguished. The first tier is represented by FC followed by OEMs, 
Vendors and Sub-vendors. For example, OEMs designs and manufactures product for 
recovery. Vendor provides disposition services of electronic hardware products and 
materials to or on behalf of FC. It also in cludes logistics service providers that either 
provide the processing services directly or through third-party recycling, reuse, or 
disposal providers. Sub-vendor (any subcontractor or downstream third party)  
provides disposition services of electronic hardware products and materials to or on 
behalf of FC’s Vendors. FC provides requirements for recovery. Such an enterprise 
network comes in the form of a stratified, directed graph consisting of n sources (Sub-
vendors) and one sink (FC). 
In RSCA model goods and information flows take place between consecutive tiers. 
Among the subsequent tiers a flow of goods and information about them takes place. 
All goods deliveries are carried out sequentially from the supplier of the last tier to the 
supplier of the first tier. The information flow is possible thanks to software agents. 
Autonomous agents representing different enterprises cooperate, co-ordinate and 
negotiate conditions in order to achieve their common goal.  
All supplies are conducted sequentially so no tier can be omitted. As can be seen in 
the figure 1, a flow (edges) of goods in certain quantities takes place between the 
entities (nodes) in the recovery network. In such network the cheapest flow with an 
appropriate capacity is finding [7]. 
Although it describes the task of linear programming, solving it by general liner 
programming methods is ineffective due to its network structure. In this case the Bu-
sacker-Gowen (BG) algorithm, which is presented in [4] is suitable. This method 
consists in increasing the flow along consecutive paths augmenting as much as their 
capacity allows. The order of appointing paths depends on their length which, in this 
case, is determined by unit costs. If the flow has achieved the defined value, comput-
ing finishes. Otherwise, the network is modified and next stages are repeated until the 
flow of the predefined value is accomplished.  
To find the cheapest chain from the source to the sink the algorithm of finding the 
shortest paths must be applied. The RSCA model has used the BMEP algorithm (see 
more in [4, 7]). 
2.2   RSCA Model Assumptions 
A given recovery network of enterprises is managed by FC. It controls the whole 
recovery process of a product in real time, from the receipt of the returned product 
through gaining resources necessary for the refurbishment to the delivery of ready 
(renewed) products to the customer. FC builds supply chains within a given network 
of enterprises. Such chains are created fo r the needs of a specific transaction evoked 
by the customer’s demand (e.g. via product return in order to carry out the recovery 
process). FC is also engaged in the optimization of the already existing supply chains 
and the control of their efficient accomplishment so that the customers’ expectations 
related to service quality are met and the costs are reduced at the same time. However, 
the remaining enterprises from the network are directly responsible for the organiza-
tion and co-ordination of the streams (of goods and information) generated by the 
suppliers and recipients of the next tier.

296 A. Kawa and P. Golinska 
The fundamental assumption of the proposed RSCA model is to accept the model 
of the reality under considerat ion in the form of a stratified, directed graph with indi-
vidual nodes and edges represented by software agents. A number of additional pre-
sumptions essential for correct comprehension and operation of the model have also 
been distinguished. It is assumed that: 
• FC administers a tool which enables to visualize the network composed of all 
the suppliers and recipients, the relations between them as well as the review 
of the whole production process. 
• All suppliers of the individual tiers have the same or very similar production 
process. 
• FC has access to information about product prices, quality, etc. and supply 
(production capacity) offered by all members of the enterprise network. 
• Customers’ individual return notices ar e collected and consolidated at speci-
fied time intervals (e.g. once a day) and passed on by FC to the right members 
of the configured supply chain. 
• Separate graphs, in which the current connections between enterprises are rep-
resented, are built for each collective order.  
• A homogeneous Bill of Materials, which provides information necessary to 
calculate the size of the production and supply order, is used in the whole net-
work. Thanks to that, suppliers of subsequent tiers know what products, semi-
products, subsets, individual elements, raw materials and in what quantities to 
deliver in order to produce a given good [8]. 
• The realization of the flows between suppliers and recipients may be carried 
out by the enterprise itself or by an external provider (e.g. a logistics service 
provider, a courier). 
• The costs of sending a flow unit along an edge in a graph are treated as the result 
of synthetic evaluation of the cooperation between the recipient and the supplier. 
The software agent of each recipient carries out an evaluation of its direct sup-
pliers, taking into consideration a set of criteria, and then places it on the register 
server. The information is constantly updated.   
• The total of the flows outgoing from a given supplier to their recipients equals 
the supply value (production capacity) of the supplier in question.  
3   Implementation-Simulation Results 
The RSCA model was implemented in the NetLogo. It is a programmable modeling 
platform for simulating which allows to give instructions to a lot of independent agents 
interacting with one another and performing multiple tasks. The turtles (agents) can be 
connected to one another by “links” which are also programmable. Collectively, the 
turtles and links are called agents [9]. 
In the simulating model four kinds of “breeds” were distinguished: FC, OEMs, 
Vendors and Sub-vendors, which allowed to define different behaviors and “agentsets” 
of those breeds.

Supply Chain Arrangements in Recovery Network 297 
 
Fig. 2. Screenshot of exemplary recovery network in the NetLogo platform 
The quantity of the potential entities in each tier (except for the 1 st tier) is assumed 
t o  r a n g e  f r om  5  t o  2 0 0 .  T h i s  n u m b e r  c a n  be increased or decreas ed with the slider 
(nodes-num). There is only one FC in each network (see fig. 2). Different FCs from 
other recovery networks may compete with others [7]. 
Two other parameters of this network were distinguished: chain-demand and  
supply-indicator. The first one is a demand of the FC which equals the whole supply 
chain demand by day. The second one is a factor of the supply changeability of par-
ticular entities of the network. 
The properties of link agents between constituents were chosen randomly as a pair 
of cost and capacity. This cost is very widely understood in this paper. It is worth to 
notice that, generally, sellers give different prices, some of which include other addi-
tional costs, but others do not. A lower price is offset by significantly higher acquisi-
tion costs such as those of delivery, monitoring, coordination and other administrative 
tasks [2]. Thus, it is very difficult to compare them with one another. Moreover, the 
criteria for the choice of the preceding entity may comprise the price, product or ser-
vice quality, production and delivery time, reliability, customer service, location, etc. 
In the RSCA cost comprised all these components. All of them are quantified and, as 
a result, can be comparable. We set the cost as a variable between 1.0 and 6.0. In turn, 
capacity is a variable which depends on the aforementioned supply-indicator.1 
Due to the fact that time, or carrying out the recovery on time, to be more precise, 
is an important parameter, it has been assumed that in a given network there are only 
such connections between the suppliers of consecutive tiers which can guarantee that 
                                                           
1 It is established according to the following procedure: c hain-demand * supply-indicator + 
random (chain-demand * supply-indicator ). For example, if chain-demand = 10000 and sup-
ply-indicator  = 0.1, then supply amounts to not less than 1000 and not more than 1999.

298 A. Kawa and P. Golinska 
the whole operation from the moment of receiving the returned good, thro ugh gaining 
resources, the refurbishment to the product delivery will be completed in 90 days. 
In the recovery network we look for such supply chains which meet the require-
ments and are most effective. In order to find such chains (so the shortest path in the 
graph), the BG and BMEP algorithms are used. Because the FC demand can be com-
pletely or partially satisfied, there can be one or more such chains. Their number 
depends on the supply and demand changeability. 
In order to check the capabilities of recovery supply chain configuration and the  
effectiveness of the RSCA model a lot the simulation experiments were carried out. 
Their aim was to study how the changes of the node numbers ( nodes-num) and sup-
ply-indicator influence the average supply chain numbers ( sc-num) and the average 
cost of sending a flow unit along the supply chain ( avg-cost) in the recovery network. 
For multiple runs of the model the BehaviorSpace tool was used which allows collect-
ing data in an external file [7]. 
For the first group of the simulation experiments it was assumed that supply-
indicator = 0.1 and chain-demand = 100002. The number of entities ( nodes-num) in a 
particular tier was changing and consecutively amounted to: 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 and 
200 (simultaneously, this number in other tiers was stable and equaled 20). The simu-
lations were run 1000 times for each case. The findings of the experiment show that 
as nodes-num augments (from 5 to 200), avg-cost decreases by 30% on average, but 
for OEMs the fall is greatest and reaches 44% (see fig. 3). It can be explained by  
the following dependency: the more suppliers there are in a given tier, the higher the 
competitiveness among them is and the lower the prices, the better the conditions of 
cooperation, etc., become for the final customers.  The greatest decline of avg-cost is 
observed when nodes-num is increased from 5 to 50 (by 25% on average). Figure 3 also 
shows that the greater the nodes-num in the vicinity of the FC (so OEMs, Vendors and 
Sub-vendors successively), the lower the avg-cost. 
 
Fig. 3. Influence of enterprises number change in particular tiers on the average cost of sending 
a flow unit along a supply chain in the network 
 
                                                           
2 The total annual reuse of equipment in the HP company amounts to approximately 2,5 million 
of units per year. We divided this number by 250 working days.

Supply Chain Arrangements in Recovery Network 299 
In the next stage, we changed all nodes-nums at the same time and noticed the 
greatest decrease of avg-cost when nodes-num rose from 5 to 50 (by 58%), too (see 
fig. 4). A further modification of this parameter is also beneficial but not to such a 
large extent. It must be remembered that a big number of suppliers ensures lower 
product prices for the recipient, guarantees more safety and reduces the risk of  
production stoppage, but, on the other hand, causes an increase of the servicing costs 
of such co-operation (maintenance costs of information systems, control, search of 
supply sources, negotiation, establishing the co-operation conditions, audit, etc.). One 
must not forget about the hidden costs related to a limited number of suppliers, either, 
such as the cost of lost sales caused by a lack of products or about the fact that libera-
tion from a monopolist supplier is time-consuming. In the case of our recovery  
network a number of suppliers in individual tiers equal to 50 may be recommended.  
 
Fig. 4. Influence of enterprises number change simultaneous in all tiers on the average cost of 
sending a unit along a supply chain in the recovery network 
 
Fig. 5.  Influence of the factor of supply changeability on the supply chains number in the  
recovery network

300 A. Kawa and P. Golinska 
 
Fig. 6. Influence of the factor of supply changeability on the average cost of sending a flow unit 
along a supply chain in the recovery network 
In the last part of the simulations, the supply-indicator variable was shifted from 
0.1 to 1.0 (consecutively 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0), on the assumption that nodes-
num is stable and amounts to 20 and chain-demand = 10000. 3 The simulations were 
carried out 1000 times for each case. The results from the experiment show that  
sc-num falls from 40 to 1 (see fig. 5). It is worth to notice that augmenting supply-
indicator ten times (i.e. from 0.01 to 0.1) leads the average supply chain numbers 
which can satisfy the demand of the FC more quickly to plunge from 40 to 13, i.e. by 
68%. As a result of the rise of supply-indicator from 0.01 to 1.0, avg-cost comes 
down from 6.4 to 3.7, i.e. by 42% (see fig. 6). The main conclusion from this part of 
the simulation experiments is that it is more profitable to cooperate with a trading 
partner with greater capacities and an ability to offer greater supply. It reduces the 
number of supply chains. 
4   Conclusions 
Application of the agent technology and graph theory in logistics allows departing from 
fixed supply chains, in which enterprises are dependent on one another, and replace 
them with dynamic configurable supply chains, including constituents, which offer the 
best conditions of cooperation at a given moment. The presented RSCA model enables 
to find the cheapest supply chains with appr opriate capacities in the whole enterprise 
network. Therefore, a company being a supply chain leader can satisfy its demand more 
quickly and can propose a competitive price to customers. 
It is noteworthy that the proposed RSCA model offers many benefits for the net-
work of enterprises, its participants and the final customer. Some of the most impor-
tant ones have been distinguished below: goods flow visualization; fast and easy 
building of closed-loop supply chains; delivery time, stock and cost minimization. 
The proposed model allows also: quick identification and elimination of bottlenecks,  
 
                                                           
3 Here supply fluctuates between (100 + random 100) and (10000 + random 10000).

Supply Chain Arrangements in Recovery Network 301 
as well as very quick reception of the re turned product, in accordance with the cus-
tomer’s expectations, at competitive prices. It gives a possibility to build scenarios 
and carry out simulations independently. 
References 
1. Beamon, B., Fernandes, C.: Supply – chain network configuration for product recovery. Pro-
duction Planning and Control 15(3), 270–281 (2004) 
2. Cannon, J.P., Homburg, C.: Buyer-supplier relationships and customer firm costs. Journal of 
Marketing 65(1) (2001) 
3. Dekker, R., Fleischmann, M., Inderfurth, K., Van Wassenhove, L.N. (eds.): Reverse Logis-
tics: Quantitative Models for Closed-Loop Supply Chains. Springer, Berlin (2003) 
4. Deo, N., Kowalik, J.S., Sysło, M.M.: Discrete  Optimization Algorithms with Pascal Pro-
grams. Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs (1983) 
5. Fleischmann, M.: Reverse logistics network structures and design, Erasmus Research Insti-
tute of Management. In: Guide Jr., V.D.R., Van Wassenhove, L.N. (eds.) Business Aspects 
of Closed Loop Supply Chain, Springer, Berlin (2003) 
6. Golinska, P.: The concept of an agent-based system for planning of closed loop supplies in 
manufacturing system. In: Omatu, S., Rocha, M.P., Bravo, J., Fernández, F., Corchado, E., 
Bustillo, A., Corchado, J.M., et al. (eds.) IWANN 2009. LNCS, vol. 5518, pp. 346–349. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
7. Kawa, A.: Simulation of Dynamic Supply Chain Configuration based on Software Agents 
and Graph Theory. In: Omatu, S., Rocha, M.P., Bravo, J., Fernández, F., Corchado, E., 
Bustillo, A., Corchado, J.M., et al. (eds.) IWANN 2009. LNCS, vol. 5518, pp. 382–389. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
8. Reid, R., Sanders, D., Nada, R.: Operations Management. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester 
(2002) 
9. Wilensky, U.: NetLogo itself. NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
Based Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 302–311, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
A Study of Stock Market Trading Behavior and Social 
Interactions through a Multi Agent Based Simulation 
Zahra Kodia, Lamjed Ben Said, and Khaled Ghedira 
LI3/ISG, 
41, Rue de la Liberte, Cite Bouchoucha 2000 Le Bardo, 
Tunis – Tunisia 
{zahra.kodia,lamjed.bensaid,khaled.ghedira}@isg.rnu.tn 
http://www.soie.isg.rnu.tn/li3 
Abstract. In this paper, we study the stock market trading behavior and the  
interactions between traders. We propose a novel model which includes beha-
vioral and cognitive attitudes of the trader at the micro level and explains their 
effects on his decision making at the macro level. The proposed simulator is 
composed of heterogeneous Trader agen ts with a behavioral cognitive model 
and the CentralMarket agent matching buying and selling orders. Our artificial 
stock market is implemented using distributed artificial intelligence techniques. 
The resulting simulation system is a tool able to numerically simulate financial 
market operations in a realistic way. Experiments show that representing the 
micro level led us to validate some stylized facts related to stock market and to 
observe emergent socio-economic phenomena at the macro level. 
Keywords: Multi-agent based simulation, Cognitive and behavioral modeling, 
Trading agents, Stock market, Volatility. 
1   Introduction 
The complexity of financial market still represents a wide field of research and appli-
cations [2]. Empirical and numerical analyses  of stock market are powerful; neverthe-
less they still insufficient [13]. Previous researches, such as in [9], are generally based 
on the hypothesis of rational behavior. We notice that the existing stochastic models 
have shown critical limits [22]. Therefore, emerged evidences show that stock mar-
kets could not be only studied with a rational paradigm [1]. In the last decade, we 
complete the description of theoretical phenomena by many aspects based on the 
traders’ behavior and their interactions.  
A study of the state of the art has given us the opportunity to illustrate the evolution 
of approaches studying the stock market and to identify the existing relationships be-
tween the major works. We interpret these relationships by a map shown in figure 1. 
We note that the list of considered works is not exhaustive. In this state-of-the-art map 
(figure 1), we consider two kinds of relation between woks: “ Inspire” and “ use”.  
The link “Inspire” means that the original work affects and motivates the linked work. 
The link “use” means that the linked work employs the model proposed by the original

A Study of Stock Market Trading Behavior and Social Interactions 303 
work for some purpose via another approach. We distinguish an evolution of ap-
proaches used to study the stock market: (1) numerical approach during the eighties 
based on a stochastic modeling: [5], [10] and [15], (2) multi-agent based systems simu-
lating stock market dynamics: [1], [9], [16], [17], [18], [19] and [21] and (3) behavioral 
multi-agent based systems in recent years: [12]. We note that psychological biases 
prevent traders from acting fully rationally and thus undermine the basic premise of the 
efficient market hypothesis [22]. 
The purpose of our paper is to study the stock market trading behavior and social 
interactions through a behavioral multi agent based system. This paper is structured as 
follows. In the second section, we describe the micro/macro level oh the stock market. 
First, we define a trader transaction protocol. Second, we detail the trader making 
decision and the behavioral attitude’s affects. Then, we represent social networks and 
interactions in our artificial stock market. In the third section, we expose the simula-
tion and some results. Finally, in the fourth section, we conclude the paper and we 
summarize future works. 
 
Fig. 1. The state-of-the-art map: Stock Market studies 
2   The Micro/Macro Level of the Stock Market 
The agent approach [8] offers the possibility to model and to study two granularity 
levels of the stock market: the micro and the macro level. At the micro level, it gives 
the opportunity to observe the individual be havior of each trader. This approach al-
lows to describe and to provide for each the basic mechanisms to decide for itself 
when, how and why a particular action must be made [6].

304 Z. Kodia, L.B. Said, and K. Ghedira 
2.1   Trader Transaction Protocol 
This paper introduces a novel model representing the stock market dynamics. Our 
artificial stock market includes the central market agent essentially responsible for 
executing transactions via an order book. It includes also a several kinds of trader 
agents depending to their profile. We take into account three pairs of behavioral  
attitudes: (1) Pessimism / optimism, (2) Speculation /Caution and (3) Mimetism / 
Leadership. In fact, trader decision maki ng constitute a complex process which is 
based on cognitive and rational paradigm and biased by behavioral attitudes [23].  
Interactions between traders and inform ation’s exchange during a transaction  
reproduce the market dynamics and organize the multi-agent based pricing. We adopt 
an approach based on the notions of Agent, Group and Role (AGR) [11] for the repre-
sentation of our organizational model. Our artificial stock market is composed of: (1) 
a set of agents corresponding to the considered two types of actors: ExpertTrader 
agents and NoviceTrader agents, (2) a CentralMarket agent responsible of conducting 
transactions and controlling the dynamics of the stock market. 
 
Fig. 2. Agent UML sequence diagram: Trader transaction protocol 
Figure 2 shows the Trader transaction protocol via an Agent UML sequence  
diagram. It specifies the sequence of messages that are exchanged along with their 
corresponding event occurrences on the actors’ lifelines of our artificial stock market. 
Our two types of traders (expert and novice) have several features in common, we 
propose a generalization: the Trader agent. This sequencing diagram represents the

A Study of Stock Market Trading Behavior and Social Interactions 305 
confrontation of supply and demand for stocks by novice and expert traders via the 
central market. The latter does not act as a centralized entity but as a meeting place 
used by traders to interact and realize st ocks’ exchanges. We use FIPA-ACL (Agent 
Communication Language) specifications to encode the messages’ content. The first 
message informs is sent by the central market and informs traders that the transaction 
day is open. The add-Role message announces the presence of traders. It determines 
also the role played by the sender: ExpertInvestor role or NoviceInvestor role. Ex-
pertTrader and NoviceTrader send a request message asking for stock information.  
CentralMarket replies for each message by collect ing the needed information. After 
taking decision, ExpertTrader can either give advice or recommend a stock to other 
ExpertTraders and NoviceTraders through a Send-Proposal message. He communi-
cates also the stock trend to the CentralMarket via an inform message. The  
NoviceTrader can also give advices to other trader playing NoviceInvestor role. Three 
choices are then possible for traders: (1) if the decision is to hold, trader refuses the 
proposal, (2) if the decision is to buy and the trader purchases capitals, he accepts 
buying and he sends a buy order via an Accept-Proposal message and (3) if the deci-
sion is to sell and the trader owns stocks, he accepts selling and he sends a sell order. 
We define a market order as a request to trade a specific quantity of a stock at specific 
price. Every 30 seconds during a trading day, CentralMarket executes the fixing by 
matching sell and buy orders and calculating the market price of the considered stock. 
Then, a notification ( send message) is transmitted to the correspondent senders of 
executed orders. 
2.2   Trader Making Decision 
We assume that the trader targets a single goal during a trading day. The goals taken 
into account by our model are the security of the capital, profitability and speculating 
and finally liquidity and availability. The objective influences all processes of the 
model and determines the trader schedule (the period during which it remains inactive 
on our artificial stock market). This schedule ranges from 1step of simulation (which 
marks an active trader) and 20 steps. If th e trader aims to secure his capital,  
his schedule will be relatively large compared to those who seek opportunities to 
capitalize on speculating. While the schedule for the trader who opts for liquidity and 
availability will be regular. The cognitive behavior model of the trader illustrated in 
figure 3 describes his perceptual, informationa l and decisional processes. It includes 
the behavioral attitudes which influence these processes. We notice that this figure 
represents both expert and novice trader behavior since the rational component in-
cludes fundamental and chart analysis. In fact, in our model, the novice trader makes 
use only of the chart analysis. 
2.2.1   Perceptual Process 
The trader agent is accepted in the market if and only if it plays an expert or novice 
role and verifies the four following conditions during the simulation: (1) the agent has 
a wealth not null, (2) the agent leaves the market if he loses its liquidity and does no 
more stocks in its portfolio, (3) the agent can issue an order to buy only if his liquidity 
has corresponding to the total amount, so it can issue an order to sell a number of

306 Z. Kodia, L.B. Said, 
shares only if he has in th e
there is a schedule relative f
The agent takes into acc
of privacy and / or the filt e
message is part of trust ne t
the message is refused. Fo r
than the information certai n
erwise, the receiver refuses 
2.2.2   Informational Proc
For our modeling, we ada p
rational analysis: (1) stock e
and (4) chart analysis. Each
hold (respectively +1, -1 a
ExpertTrader. However, N
can not anticipate changes 
indicators calculated by ex
tralMarket agent. The latt e
stock market transactions, (
(3) matching orders of sale
(4) updating stock informat
Rational analysis 
The first analysis is based 
model). This model only r
which can be found from pa
The second analysis is b
matic risk (or market risk)
cient indicates how the e x
return of the financial mark
and K. Ghedira 
e corresponding quantity of stocks in its portfolio and 
for each agent after which he observes the market.  
ount the message received if it is filtered through the f i
er of confidence. For the privacy filter, if the sender of 
twork of the receiver, the message is accepted. Other w
r the confidence filter, if the acceptance threshold is lo w
nty threshold, this information is taken into account. O
the message. 
 
Fig. 3. Trader making decision 
cess 
pt four complementary approaches necessary to accomp
evaluation, (2) risk measuring, (3) growth rate of divide
h analysis provides a numerical signal d to buy, to sell o
and 0). We assume that these analyses are used onl y
NoviceTrader uses just the chart analysis. The latter a g
in the stock price only from the chart analysis. He use s
pert traders. These indicators are also transmitted to C
er agent offers the following actions: (1) launching of 
(2) publication of information related to stocks for tra d
e and purchase and execution of transactions via the fix i
tion and (5) calculating the market trend. 
on the constant growth model (known as Gordon Sha p
requires data from one period and an average growth r
ast financial statements [20].  
based on the risk measuring. We used the notion of sy
, which is indicated by a given coefficient β. This co e
xpected return of a stock or portfolio is correlated to 
ket as a whole. It is calculated by the CentralMarket. 
(4) 
ilter 
the 
wise, 
wer 
Oth-
lish 
ends 
or to 
y by 
gent 
s so 
Cen-
the 
ders, 
ing, 
piro 
rate 
yste-
effi-
the

A Study of Stock Market Trading Behavior and Social Interactions 307 
The third analysis determines the growth rate of dividends. The latter is necessary 
in order to use the dividend discount model, which assumes that a stock's price is 
determined by the estimated future dividends, discounted by the excess of internal 
growth over the firm's estimated dividend growth rate. 
The fourth analysis is based on the hypothesis that the past development of a finan-
cial asset provides better information about its own future. In our model, we are 
guided by the Points and Figure Charting (PFC) [7]. This method represents the 
changes of the stock price and announces the signal of buying or selling. 
Behavioral attitudes  
We introduce in our model three pairs of behavioral attitudes. For the representation 
of behavior attitudes, we adopt the generic approach introduced in [4]. This approach 
is based on the specification of a set of inhibitor and triggering thresholds. In fact, 
each trader agent receives various kinds of qualitative stimuli (experts’ opinion and 
advice) and quantitative stimuli (market trend and market price). The stimuli affect 
the trader agent decisions of buying or selling.  
─ Optimism / pessimism attitudes 
In our model, this behavioral component plays a crucial role in determining the es-
timated rates. The optimistic trader agent, which has a confidence in the outcome, 
does not react the same way as the pessimistic trader agent. These attitudes affect the 
rational analysis and more specifically the evaluating performance. Furthermore, in 
the informational process of our model, optimistic trader agent over-estimates rates 
while the pessimistic trader agent under estimates them. 
─ Speculation/caution attitudes 
A speculator trader agent d ecides to conduct a transact ion (buy or sell) by accept-
ing the risk of losing in order to gain maximum benefits. Besides, a cautious trader 
agent proceeds with prudence and prefers to take every detail into account before 
buying or selling. This difference influences the rational analysis. Indeed, the specula-
tor trader agent decides to buy a stock even if it presents a high rate of risk, something 
unacceptable by the cautious trader agent. We consider that these attitudes affect also 
the perceptual process.  
─ Imitation/leadership attitudes 
An imitator trader agent reproduces uncons ciously the reaction of his entourage of 
traders. It follows and is aligned with the overall trend of the market. Whereas, the 
leader holds the dominant market position and take initiatives to buy or sell stocks. 
These behavioral attitudes influence the perceptual process which is more extended 
for the leader than the imitator trader. In deed, the number of persons composing the 
confidence network (called TrustNet) of an im itator trader is larger compared to the 
leader one who has confidence in a few number of traders. 
2.2.3   Decisional Process  
The ExpertTrader agents’ decision-making takes place after the four tests relative to: 
stock evaluation, risk measuring, dividend rate measuring and chart analysis.

308 Z. Kodia, L.B. Said, 
Each test gives out respec t
signed by 
(as shown in figure 3) is cal
We notice that the paramet e
tion that their sum is equal 
to +1 (which indicates sel l
transformed to an order e x
which the agent runs a tr a
the ThRunTr related to the 
speculator investor.  
2.3   Social Networks and 
In this section, we discuss 
We underline the effects o f
and on the emergence of a 
structures in which they f i
agents. In our simulation, t h
tionship (trust, privacy, etc
neighbors. The links bet w
effects, namely the clusterin
Fig. 4. Watts-Stroga
We assume that the sto c
[24] of social network. Th e
small-word and clustering c
mation circulates randoml y
investors are grouped into c
3   Simulation and Re
Our simulator is impleme n
ming language. For all th e
one stock traded and 200 i
ௌ௧௢௖௞ா௩௔௟,ோ௜௦௞
ߣכ 
and K. Ghedira 
tively a signal to buy, sell or do nothing respectively 
. The final deci s
lculated as follows: 
ers  are generated randomly under the co n
to 1. Therefore, D ranges from -1 (which indicates buy i
ling) and just represents a signal. We note that D wil l
xpect if defines a threshold 
ansaction following its decision-making. We assume t
cautious investor is lower than the one considered by 
Interactions 
the social interconnections in our artificial stock mar k
f the trader neighborhood on the making decision pro c
global behavior. Indeed, behaviors of traders are relate d
it. The Trader agent is in a direct relationship with o t
he neighborhood is not physical but it is a neighborly r e
.). A trader can make and receive advice or opinion o f
ween traders are very complex and characterized by t
ng effects and the small word effects [3].  
 
atz model of social network in our artificial stock market 
ck market is represented by a Watts-Strogatz (W-S) m o
e W-S model illustrated in figure 4 fits very well on b
characteristics. It provides investors’ clusters where in f
y among heterogeneous set of traders. At each time s t
clusters creating neighborhoods of connected agents.  
esults 
nted using the MadKit platform [11] using java progr a
e experiments, we run the simulation on 25000 steps w
investors (divided into 80 expert investors and 120 no v
௞ெ௘௔௦௨௥௘ ,ோ஽௜௩௜ௗ௘௡ௗ  and ஼௛௔௥௧஺௡௔௟௬௦௜௦
כ݈ܽ݊ܣݐݎ݄ܽܥݕ 
ߜ݀݊ܽߛ 
ȁ ൑ ThRunTr. ThRunTr 
de-
sion 
 
ndi-
ing) 
l be 
for 
that  
the 
ket. 
cess 
d to 
ther 
ela-
f its 
two  
odel 
both 
for-
tep, 
am-
with 
vice 
ݕݏ݅ݏ.

A Study of Stock Market Trading Behavior and Social Interactions 309 
investors). A w-s social network is defined where agents are interconnected with their 
4 nearest neighbor and randomly with each possible other agents using a probability 
of 10%. This results in a one dimensional circle illustrated in figure 4 where traders 
have 6 contacts on the average. Average length path is 5,8 and cluster coefficient 
equals to 35,27%. We observe some statistical results which show that many stylized 
facts of real stock markets are reproduced with our model.  
 
Fig. 5. Scaling of autocorrelations 
In order to study autocorrelations in the measure of volatility, we represent the log-
log plot of the logarithmic returns െ 1ሻ (Figure 5). The 
model thereby introduces price volatility correlations which is an element of stylized 
facts.  
In figure 6, we present the fat tails of returns. Figure 6.a presents a normal proba-
bility plot of price returns. We are typically concerned about whether the price return 
is distributed according to a normal distribu tion, since many of the statistical infe-
rence procedures that we use require the assumption of normality of the returns. For 
comparing, the solid line represents the cumulative distribution of the standard normal 
distribution N(0,1). 
Besides, price returns exhibit fatter tails than the standard normal, or Gaussian,  
distribution and presents a kurtosis equals to 5.52. The leptokurtosis distribution is 
shown in figure 6.b. This figure presents the price returns distribution compared to a 
theoretical normal distribution.  
Furthermore, financial time series usually exhibit a characteristic known as vola-
tility clustering, in which large changes tend to follow large changes, and small 
changes tend to follow small changes. In this  case, changes from one step to the next 
are typically of unpredictable sign. Large perturbations, positive or negative, become 
part of the information set used to construct the variance forecast of the next period's 
perturbation. In fact, large shocks of either sign are allowed to persist, and can influ-
ence the volatility forecasts for several periods. 
We conclude that our behavioral model is able to reproduce some stylized facts  
observed in real stock market and to assure no predictability of future price develop-
ments and an efficient price formation.

310 Z. Kodia, L.B. Said, and K. Ghedira 
(a)     (b) 
  
Fig. 6.  Fat tails: (a) Normal probability plot of logarithmic returns, (b) Leptokurtosis of the 
distribution of returns 
4   Conclusion and Future Works 
Our research focuses on the modeling of the stock market trading through modeling 
the behavior and decision making of investor agent. Our contribution is to consider 
the stock market as a social organization of autonomous actors with dependents  
heterogeneous beliefs and different behavioral attitudes. Our model exhibits the ob-
servation of some stylized facts (i.e., volatility clustering and fat tail) and assures no 
predictability of future price developments and an efficient price formation. 
Different perspectives can be considered in  our work. The first is to focus on the 
study of others stylized facts such as the Multi-scaling. The second is to explore the 
memory effect and the uncertainty at various levels in the stock market.  
References 
1. Arifovic, J.: The behavior of the exchange rate in the genetic algorithm and experimental 
economies. Journal of Political Economy 104, 510–541 (1996) 
2. Arthur, W.B., Durlauf, S.N., Lane, D.A.: The Economy as an Evolving Complex System 
II, 27th edn., pp. 15–44. Santa Fe Institute, Addison-Wesley, Reading (1997) 
3. Bakker, L., Hareb, W., Khosravi, H., Ramadanovic, B.: A social network model of in-
vestment behaviour in the stock market. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Appli-
cations 389(6), 1223–1229 (2009) 
4. BenSaid, L., Bouron, T.: Multi-agent simulation of virtual consumer populations in a 
competitive market. In: Seventh Scandinavian Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(SCAI 2001). Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, pp. 31–43. IOS Press, 
Denmark (2001) 
5. Bray, M.: Learning, estimation, and the stability of rational expectations. Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory 26(2), 318–339 (1982) 
6. Dessalles, J., Muller, J.P., Phan, D.: Emerge nce in multi-agent systems: conceptual and 
methodological issues. In: Denis, P., Frédéric, A. (eds.) Agent-based modelling and si-
mulation in the social and human sciences, pp. 327–355. The Bardwell Press, Oxford 
(2007) 
7. Dorsey, T.: Point and figure charting: The essential application for forecasting and track-
ing market prices, 3rd edn. Wiley Trading, Chichester (2007)

A Study of Stock Market Trading Behavior and Social Interactions 311 
8. Ferber, J.: Multi-Agent System: An Introduction to Distributed Artificial Intelligence. 
Addison-Wesley, Reading (1999) 
9. Gode, D., Sunder, S.: Allocative Efficiency Of Markets With Zero Intelligence Traders. 
Journal Of Political Economy 101, 119–137 (1993) 
10. Grossman, S., Stiglitz, J.: On the impossibility  of informationally efficient markets. 
American Economic Review 70, 393–408 (1980) 
11. Gutknecht, O., Ferber, J.: The MadKit Agent Platform Architecture. In: Wagner, T.A., 
Rana, O.F. (eds.) AA-WS 2000. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 1887, pp. 48–55. Springer, Heidel-
berg (2001) 
12. Hoffmann, A., Jager, W., Von Eije, J.H.: Social Simulation of Stock Markets: Taking It 
to the Next Level. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 10(2), 7 (2007) 
13. Hoffmann, A., Jager, W.: The effect of different needs, decision-making processes and 
network structures on investor behavior and stock market dynamics: a simulation  
approach. ICFAI, Journal of Behavioral Finance 2, 49–65 (2005) 
14. Holland, J.H.: Emergence: From Chaos to Order. Addison-Wesley, Reading (1998) 
15. Karaken, J., Wallace, N.: On the indeterminac y of equilibrium exchange rates. Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 96, 207–222 (1981) 
16. LeBaron, B.: Agent-based computational finance: suggested readings and early research. 
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 679–702 (2000) 
17. Lettau, M.: Explaining the facts with adaptive agents: the case of mutual fund flows. 
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1117–1148 (1997) 
18. Lux, T., Marchesi, M.: Special issue on heterogeneous interacting agents in financial 
markets. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 49(2), 143–147 (2002) 
19. Margarita, S., Beltratti, A.: Stock Prices and Volume in an Artificial Adaptive Stock 
Market. In: Mira, J., Cabestany, J., Prieto, A.G. (eds.) IWANN 1993. LNCS, vol. 686, 
pp. 714–719. Springer, Heidelberg (1993) 
20. Perold, A.: The Capital Asset Pricing Model. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(3),  
3–24 (2004) 
21. Routledge, B.R.: Artificial selection: genetic algorithms and learning in a rational expec-
tations model. Technical report, GSIA, Carnegie Mellon, Pittsburgh, Penn (1994) 
22. Streltchenko, O., Finin, T., Yesha, Y.: Multi-agent simulation of financial markets. For-
mal Modeling in Electronic Commerce. Springer, Heidelberg (2003) 
23. Tversky, A., Kahneman, D.: The framing of decisions and psychology of choice. 
Science 211, 453–458 (1981) 
24. Watts, D.J., Strogatz, S.H.: Collective dynamics of “small world” networks. Nature 393, 
440–442 (1998)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 312–320, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
e-Sourcing Cluster Strategies: Empathy vs. Egoism 
Konrad Fuks and Arkadiusz Kawa 
Poznań University of Economics, al. Niepodległości 10, 61-875 Poznań, Poland 
{konrad.fuks,arkadiusz.kawa}@ue.poznan.pl 
Abstract. The main contributions of this paper are the presentation, verification 
and simulations of the e-sourcing cluster strategies. For the experiment needs 
there were distinguished four sourcing strategies which refer to the level of 
agent’s empathy (willingness to search for resources that meet requirements  
of other companies) and the method of the resource distribution. The evaluation 
of each e-sourcing cluster strategy was simulated in the NetLogo environment. 
Keywords: procurement strategy, e-sourcing, clusters, emphatic agents, agent 
based simulation, logistics, e-supply chains, NetLogo. 
1   Introduction 
Sourcing, understood as the acquisition of goods  and/or services of the right quality, 
in the right quantity, place and at the right time, has existed since the beginning of 
management and has always been of great importance for economy. Already in an-
cient times merchants travelled to distant countries to purchase resources and find 
new markets. Mesopotamia imported wood, stone, metal ores and precious stones. 
Egypt provided itself with long wooden beams used in construction. Many cities 
located at the Mediterranean Sea, on the other hand, needed food and raw materials 
for craft production. Luxurious goods, such as silk imported from China, were also 
obiects of trade. The Silk Road linking Europe with Asia attracted thousands of mer-
chants avid for the precious fabric and soon became the place where European goods 
were exchanged for Asian ones. The trade towards the Mediterranean Sea mainly 
involved silk, paper and iron, whereas gold, cultivated plants and aromatic oils were 
exported to China.  
Sourcing has been subject of numerous alterations since that time. The changes 
that took place in the 1970s have had an un questionable influence on sourcing, lead-
ing consumers to satisfy their demand with higher quality products, for the lowest 
possible prices and with great delivery flexibility. Enterprises, not only had to search 
for the cheapest raw materials and components but also had to carry out production in 
different parts of the world. This kind of activity is now called global sourcing and is 
considered one of the most modern, interesting and fast developing management 
strategies1 [6, 14]. 
                                                           
1 According to the consultative company McKinsey, production of about 80% of goods will be 
conducted in a different country than that of their consumption by the year 2020. At present, 
it amounts to 20%. See [2].

e-Sourcing Cluster Strategies: Empathy vs. Egoism 313 
Among global sourcing decisions are entry into and exit from product-markets, ca-
pacity development and management in the supply base, selection and maintenance of 
sources of supply, innovation and quality issues, cost controls over the long-term, and 
the price discovery process. Buyers engage in strategic sourcing that seeks to influ-
ence behavior of sellers and develop supply bases [12]. 
Sourcing on the global scale can lead enterprises to achieve higher economic devel-
opment level and significant cost reduction. It is mainly possible thanks to cheaper but 
comparable, in terms of quality, supply goods and less expensive workforce. It is worth 
to emphasize that “global sourcing of material saves 10-25% of costs; price reduction 
advantages can reach up to 30% when sourcing from emerging economies” [12]. 
The paper is a continuation of work author’s presented at [4, 5], regarding  
resource acquisition by e-sourcing clusters. Its structure is as follows. In Section 2 the 
idea of e-sourcing is discussed. Section 3 describes the e-sourcing cluster strategies. 
Section 4 presents simulation experiment background, variables and constants. Sec-
tion 5 shows the results of the simulation experiments and concludes the paper. 
2   e-Sourcing 
Strategic sourcing on a global scale, though,  requires integration and co-ordination of 
the supply needs of the enterprise’s all economic units from the perspective of the 
common products, processes, technologies and suppliers [11]. It wouldn’t be possible 
without Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), especially the Internet, 
which dynamic development initiated in the 1990s an e-sourcing idea.  
E-sourcing is defined “as the use of Web-based applications, decision-support 
tools, and associated services to identify, evaluate, negotiate, and configure purchases 
and supplier relationships that will effectively support supply chain and other busi-
ness operations” [1]. 
On the beginning of e-sourcing evolution enterprises built electronic product cata-
logues, ordered goods via an internet browser and made payments on-line. Now  
e-sourcing manifests itself in establishing close co-operation between recipients and 
suppliers as well as in better information and knowledge management [1]. 
The benefits of e-sourcing can be divided into operational and strategic ones.  
The former include purchase costs reduction (discounts resulting from aggregation of 
purchase, greater competition among suppliers, more possibilities in the field of nego-
tiation and offer analysis, etc.) and process improvement (faster, simpler and more 
flexible product ordering, continuous accessibility of supply markets, etc.). While the 
latter are related to increasing the innovative potential of the enterprise (identification 
of new buying sources and evaluation of the previous ones, incorporating suppliers 
into innovative processes, etc.) [3]. 
The accomplishment of the e-sourcing process assumes making use of the transac-
tion-negotiation solutions. These may be: on-line auctions, on-line catalogues, elec-
tronic RFx queries and electronic marketplaces (e-markeplaces).  
The first of the above methods presumes competition between the selected partici-
pants who want to conclude a purchase or sale transaction on pre-set conditions. The 
winner of the auction is the one which has offered the best conditions. The following

314 K. Fuks and A. Kawa 
may be distinguished among on-line auctions: reverse action, dutch action, first-price 
sealed-bid auction, vickrey auction [8]. 
On-line catalogues, on the other hand, can be used in two ways: via a website or an 
electronic purchase system (in this case it is possible for the buyer to combine the 
catalogues of different suppliers, which de finitely makes comparing offers easier). 
When describing on-line catalogues, one cannot forget about the most technologically 
advanced dynamic catalogue which collects da ta directly from the catalogues on the 
suppliers’ websites [3]. 
The third transaction-negotiation solution is an electronic RFx queries. These can 
be divided into: RFI – Request For Information, RFQ – Request For Quotation and 
RFP – Request For Proposal. RFI is one of the most general ones as it is supposed to 
initiate receiving information about the supplier and the estimated purchase costs. The 
next two, RFQ and RFP, are followed by no tification about a possibility to make an 
offer. RFx queries include all requirements related to the supplier, a detailed descrip-
tion of the needed product and the criteria for the choice of the best offer [13]. 
The fourth method are e-marketplaces which, similarly to on-line catalogues, enable 
standard goods (usually raw materials) trade. These are internet platforms joining buy-
ers, sellers and brokers in order to increase the competition between suppliers and to 
obtain access to a greater number of purchasers. E-marketplaces offer dynamic price 
establishment, aggregation of orders, making offers to numerous suppliers, individual 
suppliers’ price openness, negotiation mechanisms and co-operation possibilities.  
E-marketplaces are the most sophisticated form of e-sourcing used today and its 
popularity is still rising. eMarket Services currently has about 640 e-marketplaces in 
its database [7]. 
One of the most important advantages of e-marketplaces is that it does help com-
panies find the almost ideal suppliers [5]. E-marketplaces can reduce the potential 
partner searching costs, as well as the administration costs, in both buyer and seller 
sides [10]. Although they offer a lot of facilities and have many strengths, there are 
some limitations of this solutions supporting e-sourcing. Firstly, today it is very easy 
to establish a marketplace on the Internet. Thus there are hundreds of globally operat-
ing e-marketplaces. It is very difficult to sort through all of the information about 
potential suppliers from many e-marketplaces and to compare them in order to make a 
final decision. Moreover, the environment of e-marketplaces is constantly changing – 
some e-marketplaces occasionally give much better offers than others [4]. 
3   e-Sourcing Cluster Strategies 
Those problems can be solved by the e-sourcing cluster (eSoC) presented in [4]. eSoC 
is a group of enterprises which are looking for the same type of resource, so they 
cooperate in order to acquire it more quickly and more effectively. They communi-
cate and exchange the information automatically using software agents. The eSoC 
consists of the net of enterprises, which are characterized by the capability of quick 
and dynamic adaptation to the changing market and different requirements. 
In typical situation the task of finding new, reliable suppliers on many e-
marketplaces is costly and time-consuming, especially when the company acts alone. 
But in eSoC even more competitive enterprises start to cooperate in the purchase

e-Sourcing Cluster Strategies: Empathy vs. Egoism 315 
process in order to reduce the costs of resource acquisition. Together they can achieve 
better prices than if they were operating individually. Obviously, very good activity 
coordination, proper communication, needs and goals understanding, and willingness 
to share risk are necessary [4]. 
For the experiment needs authors distinguished four eSoC strategies which refer to 
the level of scout agent’s empathy and method of resource distribution. Agent’s em-
pathy is understood as willingness to search for resources that meet requirements of 
other firms (agents) from agent’s eSoCs (e-Sourcing Clusters). Each resource has 
three kinds of fitness: price ( price), place ( place) and shipping time ( shipTime). As 
eSoCs are established on location basis agent’s empathy refers to two extant finesses 
of the resource [4]: price and shipping time. Thus, condition that found resource must 
meet, when agent is empathic, can be described as: 
 
ଵ,…,௝ ൯ (1) 
ଵ,…,௝ ൯ (2) 
 
Above equations show that empathic agent seeks for resources that suit at least one 
firm from its eSoCs. Variables ௜ and ௜ are new conditions of empathic 
agent and ଵ,…,௝ and ଵ,…,௝  are conditions of agents concentrated in em-
pathic agent’s eSoCs. Methods of resource distribution that are enclosed in eSoC 
strategies on the one hand correspond with the proportional share with resource  
acquisition, on the other hand reflect hard market law: first-come, first-buy. Four 
selected eSoC strategies are presented in table 1. 
Table 1. eSoC strategy matrix 
  Resource distribution 
  first-come, first-buy proportional 
Empathy no egoistic (strategy A) social (strategy D) 
yes helpful (strategy B) empathic (strategy C) 
4   Simulation Assumptions 
Evaluation of each e-sourcing cluster strategy was simulated in the NetLogo  envi-
ronment. NetLogo is a programmable agent based modeling environment for simulat-
ing natural and social phenomena. Full description of environment and its capabilities 
and features can be found at [15]. Worth mentioning is fact that NetLogo works on 
time basis, so changeability of the simulated model over time can be observed and 
analyzed. Implicitly time in Netlogo is measured in tick units. Tick can represent any 
possible real time unit (second, hour, day, year, specific time period, etc.). 
As in antecedent experiment [4] two kinds of breeds were distinguished: resources 
(ress) and companies ( coms). Thanks to that we could define different behaviors and 
agentsets of both breeds.

316 K. Fuks and A. Kawa 
The fitness of sought after resource was compared with the fitness of found one 
according to the rules: 
1) price of found resource cannot exceed price declared by the company or 
set by empathy mechanism (1). 
2) place of found resource must be the same as region of company. 
3) shipTime of found resource cannot exceed ship-time declared by the com-
pany or set by empathy mechanism (2). 
The basic number of potential e-marketpl aces was assumed to be 900 (based on 
eMarket Service data – cf. section 2). Other parameters, which were constant, are as 
follows: 
- cnum = 100 – initial number of companies. 
- rnum = 10 – initial number of resources. 
- max-cval = 20 – maximum value of company demand. 
- max-rval = 200 – maximum value of finding resources. 
- max-res-life = 500 – maximum resource life. 
- max-ship-weeks = 1 – maximum randomization of number of shipping 
weeks. 
Each strategy was simulated for various values of max-clu-num (maximum clusters 
number). It was assumed to take the values: 1,2,3,5,10,20. Its influence on strategy 
performance and further on companies demand satisfaction is the main experiment 
measurement. Additional important assumptions, for this experiment, describing 
resources life cycle are:  
- Method of new resources generation: every 100 ticks random rnum re-
sources are generated – from 0 to 9 resources. 
- Resources are available for random max-res-life ticks, evaluated for each 
resource independently. 
The simulation was run 1000 times for each case (changing max-clu-num and eSoC 
strategy), that gives 24000 simulation expe riments. Additionally, each case (static 
value of max-clu-num and eSoC strategy, i.e. max-clu-num = 5 and eSoC strategy A) 
was examined twenty times (each 1% of cnum decrease until cnum reaches 90 and 
each 10% of cnum decrease afterwards) to get better view of cnum changeability over 
time (ticks). When we add case when max-clu-num = 0 (there is no eSoCs, so there is 
only one strategy – strategy A), it will give us total number of 500000 simulations in 
this eSoC experiment. 
Analysis of this amount of data needed statistical methods of average values esti-
mation based on distribution of simulation output. Below section refers to average 
data of eSoC simulation experiment. 
5   Results and Conclusions 
After average values estimation, data was grouped for each max-clu-num and the best 
strategy was evaluated. One of observations is that for almost each value of max-clu-
num the best strategy depends on percentage of companies (agents) with satisfied 
demand (cnumSD). Figures 1 to 6 show how strategies B, C and D differ from strate-
gy A for each value of max-clu-num.

e-Sourcing Cluster Strategies: Empathy vs. Egoism 317 
When agents can join only one eSoC strategy C is the best until cnumSD reaches 
40%, then between 40% and 60% strategies B and C are equally the best, and when 
60% and more of population is satisfied, strategy A wins (see fig. 1). As conclusion, 
being empathic (empathy and proportional distribution of resource) when max-clu-
num = 1 is time-effective (from point of view of whole population) until demand of 
60% of population will be satisfied. After this point being egoistic (no empathy and 
first-come, first-buy resource distribution method) is the best solution. 
 
Fig. 1. e-Sourcing cluster strategies comparison for max-clu-num = 1 
Simulation results show different situation when max-clu-num = 2 (see fig. 2). 
During almost whole process of e-sourcing agent should choose between B and C 
strategy. If cnumSD exceeds 80% strategy D takes the lead in satisfaction of the popu-
lation demand. 
 
Fig. 2. e-Sourcing cluster strategies comparison for max-clu-num = 2 
Next clustering level shows slightly different results. Strategies B and C are domi-
nant, but in the first 40% of demand satisfaction agents should be helpful (strategy B). 
Between 40% and 90% one of dominant strategies (B or C) may be applied. When 
there will be only 10% of population, agents  ought to act socially (strategy D) or 
egoistically (strategy A), with little supremacy of strategy D (see fig. 3). 
ͲϭϬ͕ϬϬй
Ͳϱ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ͕ϬϬй
ϱ͕ϬϬй
ϭϬ͕ϬϬй
ϭϱ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ ϭ ϬϮ Ϭϯ Ϭϰ Ϭϱ Ϭϲ Ϭϳ Ϭϴ Ϭϵ Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘
Ͳϱ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ͕ϬϬй
ϱ͕ϬϬй
ϭϬ͕ϬϬй
ϭϱ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ ϭ ϬϮ Ϭϯ Ϭϰ Ϭϱ Ϭϲ Ϭϳ Ϭϴ Ϭϵ Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘

318 K. Fuks and A. Kawa 
 
Fig. 3. e-Sourcing cluster strategies comparison for max-clu-num = 3 
Last three cases (figures 4, 5, 6) are characterized almost with the same strategy 
evaluation. There are only two dominant strategies during whole process of e-
sourcing – strategy B and C.  
As these strategies are both empathy positive, we can assume that when  
max-clu-num increases, agent should look for resources that can meet requirements of 
other eSoC members. This can lead to higher dissemination of information about 
resource offers, faster resource circulation, higher volume of cooperation and of 
course faster satisfaction of individual demand. 
 
 
Fig. 4. e-Sourcing cluster strategies comparison for max-clu-num = 5 
 
Above analysis show that eSoC model is much more dependent on empathy than 
on method of resource distribution. This dependence presents additionally that infor-
mation dissemination has bigger value than resource division between all, interested 
in it acquisition, agents. 
Next step of data analysis was examination of how best strategies relate do basic 
strategy, i.e. when agents acts alone with egoistic strategy (acting alone eliminates 
possibility of other strategies application). Results are shown on figure 7 in addition 
to better illustrate its changeability over time.  
Above data shows how much less time agents need to satisfy their demand, when 
acting in proper environment (fixed max-clu-num and best strategies chosen over the  
 
Ͳϱ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ͕ϬϬй
ϱ͕ϬϬй
ϭϬ͕ϬϬй
ϭϱ͕ϬϬй
ϮϬ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ ϭ ϬϮ Ϭϯ Ϭϰ Ϭϱ Ϭϲ Ϭϳ Ϭϴ Ϭϵ Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘
Ͳϱ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ͕ϬϬй
ϱ͕ϬϬй
ϭϬ͕ϬϬй
ϭϱ͕ϬϬй
ϮϬ͕ϬϬй
Ϯϱ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ ϭ ϬϮ Ϭϯ Ϭϰ Ϭϱ Ϭϲ Ϭϳ Ϭϴ Ϭϵ Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘

e-Sourcing Cluster Strategies: Empathy vs. Egoism 319 
 
Fig. 5. e-Sourcing cluster strategies comparison for max-clu-num = 10 
 
Fig. 6. e-Sourcing cluster strategies comparison for max-clu-num = 20 
 
Fig. 7. Basic strategy vs. best strategies for each simulated max-clu-num value 
time). Utilization of eSoC model can boost up e-sourcing process from 13% to almost 
85% according to applied strategy. Presented on figure 7 curves have very similar  
dynamism. It shows that, when there are o lot of agents looking for the resources, 
process can boost up significantly as the value of max-clu-num increases. After reaching 
ͲϭϬ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ͕ϬϬй
ϭϬ͕ϬϬй
ϮϬ͕ϬϬй
ϯϬ͕ϬϬй
ϰϬ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ ϭ ϬϮ Ϭϯ Ϭϰ Ϭϱ Ϭϲ Ϭϳ Ϭϴ Ϭϵ Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘
ͲϭϬ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ͕ϬϬй
ϭϬ͕ϬϬй
ϮϬ͕ϬϬй
ϯϬ͕ϬϬй
ϰϬ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ ϭ ϬϮ Ϭϯ Ϭϰ Ϭϱ Ϭϲ Ϭϳ Ϭϴ Ϭϵ Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘ ǀƐ͘
Ϭ͕ϬϬй
ϭϬ͕ϬϬй
ϮϬ͕ϬϬй
ϯϬ͕ϬϬй
ϰϬ͕ϬϬй
ϱϬ͕ϬϬй
ϲϬ͕ϬϬй
ϳϬ͕ϬϬй
ϴϬ͕ϬϬй
ϵϬ͕ϬϬй
Ϭ ϭ ϬϮ Ϭϯ Ϭϰ Ϭϱ Ϭϲ Ϭϳ Ϭϴ Ϭϵ Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϭ
ϭ Ϯ ϯ ϱ ϭϬ ϮϬ

320 K. Fuks and A. Kawa 
maximum level (about 5%-10% of population satisfied), advantage over basic strategy 
decreases as the number of satisfied agents increases. When cnumSP reaches 90% level 
we can observe rapid decrease of advantage over basic strategy. The bigger value of 
max-clu-num the greater velocity of the decrease. It shows that on the beginning of the 
e-sourcing process information dissemination allows agent to reach bigger number of 
resource offers, so the process speeds up rapidly when agent cooperate. Decline of agent 
number over the time decreases amount of information that cooperating agents get and 
the advantage falls down. After reaching critical moment of process ( cnumSP = 90%) 
agents are acting alone or just few others are willing to cooperate. Hence, agent are 
forced to act as they were alone (basic strategy) and the advantage over basic strategy is 
taking a dive. Surplus that is left after completion of the e-sourcing process is mainly 
the effect of initial boost up, but it shows that applying eSoC model can shorten the e-
sourcing process from 13% to almost 40%. 
Last phase of the eSoC model evaluation experiment will involve the bundle buy-
ing and selling possibilities implementation. Additional work will be conducted in 
regard to propose practical insights into the Electronic Product Code Global Network 
standards as well as the Global Data Synchronization Networks standards.  
References 
1. Aberdeen Group. Making E-sourcing Strategic. From Tactical Technology to Core Busi-
ness Strategy (2002) 
2. Balou, R.H.: The evolution and future of logistics and supply chain management. Euro-
pean Business Review 19(4) (2007) 
3. Booz Allen., Hamilton: E-sourcing: 21 Century Purchasing (2000) 
4. Fuks, K., Kawa, A.: Simulation of Resource Acquisition by e-Sourcing Clusters Using 
NetLogo Environment. In: Håkansson, A., Nguyen, N.T., Hartung, R.L., Howlett, R.J., 
Jain, L.C. (eds.) KES-AMSTA 2009. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNAI), 
vol. 5559, Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
5. Fuks, K., Kawa, A., Wieczerzycki, W.: Improved e-Sourcing Strategy with Multi-Agent 
Swarms. In: Conference on Intelligent Agents, Web Technologies and Internet Commerce 
(IAWTIC 2008), IEEE Computer Society, Washington (2009) 
6. Gant, M.: Total Quality Management und Global Sourcing. Beschaffung aktuell (9) (1991) 
7. http://www.emarketservices.com 
8. Kaufmann, L., Carter, C.R.: Deciding on the mode of negotiation: To auction or not to 
auctionelectronically. Journal of Supply Chain Management 40(2) (2004) 
9. Leung, C.S., et al.: Analysis and Design of an Agent Searching Algorithm for  
e-Marketplaces. Cluster Computing (7) (2004) 
10. Lysons, K., Farrington, B.: Purchasing and supply chain management. Prentice Hall,  
Englewood Cliffs (2006) 
11. Seshadri, S.: Sourcing strategy: principles, policy, and designs. Springer, NY (2005) 
12. Simplexity. Finding outsource resources: The RFI, RFP/RFQ Approach (2003) 
13. Welge, M.K.: Globales Management (1990) 
14. Wilensky, U.: NetLogo itself. In: NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
Based Modeling. Northwestern University. Evanston,  
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 321–329, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Application of Economic Order Value  
for Creation of Time-Defined Transactions  
in Web-Based Open Sourcing System 
Paulina Golinska, Grzegorz Klimarczyk, Zygmunt Kopacz,  
and Michał Masadynski 
Poznan University of Technology, Faculty of Computing and Management,  
Strzelecka 11, 0965 Poznan, Poland 
paulina.golinska@put.poznan.pl, 
{grzegorz.klimarczyk,zygmunt.kopacz,michal.masadynski}@gmail.com 
Abstract. Companies search for possibilities to lower their materials supply 
costs. E-sourcing provides  new techniques that focus primarily on the quality 
and price of materials and enables the possibility to reach a bigger number of 
potential suppliers. In this paper authors present the concept of Economic Order 
Value and its application in e-sourcing strategy. The detailed procedure for 
creation of optimal time-defined transactions is described. The advantages and 
disadvantages of elaborated solution are discussed.  
Keywords: e-sourcing, web-based services, supply, economic order value. 
1   Introduction 
Normally it is difficult for company to search through all of the information about 
potential suppliers and to compare one offer with another in order to make a transac-
tion. Even judging by proposed cost alone may be difficult because one must take into 
consideration delivery time, quality, quantity of the materials, also other factors. Web-
based sourcing systems provide necessary tools which let customers organize and 
compare suppliers’ information more effectively. 
Intelligent business e-sourcing solutions help customers defining and developing a 
procurement strategy for materials purchasing. It allows saving time by prequalifying 
suppliers in order to minimize the time spent on the pre-transaction part of procure-
ment process. It helps also developing strong relationships with suppliers, particularly 
those who provide the most key items. 
In this paper authors present the concept of Economic Order Value (EOV), a tech-
nique that helps to prequalify suppliers and optimizes the size of purchase for cus-
tomers’ time-defined transactions. Authors have modified well known lot sizing 
technique of Economic Order Quantity EOQ. This technique allows optimizing the 
size of delivery on basis of minimization of the combined cost of placing order (ac-
quiring) and inventory carrying. The traditional EOQ is usually applied to optimize a 
size of purchase of single type of material/products [4,5]. In business practice one

322 P. Golinska et al. 
supplier is very often able to deliver a range of similar materials. Consolidated pur-
chasing of different materials requires a unified measurement in order to compare the 
initial offers of different suppliers. It is assumed that this unified measurement can 
be money, so authors have transposed the traditional EOQ equitation to so called 
Economic Order Value (EOV). Detailed calculations of EOV are presented in  
Section 2. The advantages and disadvantages of elaborated solution are discussed  
in Section 3.  
2   Economic Order Value Calculation 
2.1   Data Requirements  
Web-based open sourcing platform connects a number of customers and suppliers. A 
e-sourcing service can be seen from two different viewpoints. From the point of view 
of a client (service consumer) a service is a special software component which exclu-
sively exports functionality and does not import any functionality. A Web Service is a 
special kind of service which’s interface is specified using standardized XML lan-
guages. The use of a Web Service is dependent to the exchange of messages that are 
structured according to the specifications of the Web Service interface. All messages 
are exchanged over an existing (conventional) network as e.g. the internet. Thereby 
the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is used in most cases as underlying transfer 
protocol. From the point of view of a service provider a service is an application  
system which fulfils the mentioned requirements for each possible user (service con-
sumer). The availability of all imported functions the service needs to perform an 
offered functionality has to be organized by the providers themselves.  
As shown in figure 1 service consumer and a service provider are separated  
systems.  
BA
Consumer
Legend
Business application
Web Service-based 
integration
Logical system border
Provider
Imported interface
Exported interface
System 1 System 2
 
Fig. 1. Web Service-based integration of business applications [1] 
In this paper authors present the e-sourcing web service that might by applied for 
repetitive transaction within pre-defined time framework. Time framework for trans-
actions is described by customers according to their requirements. Figure 2 presents 
the scope of data required in order to create a time- defined transactions with applica-
tion of EOV.

Application of EOV for Creation of Time-Defined Transactions 323 
 
Fig. 2. Input-output data structure 
The following data is required in order to define EOV:  
• The size of demand in analyzed period is based on forecast or already col-
lected customer’s orders (in case of industry with long production cycles). 
• The dimension of particular part/ material can be easily obtained from tech-
nological data sources or from Bill of Material (BOM) module in client’s 
ERP system.  
•  The max. value of particular order is defined by client depending on his  
financial statement or size of warehousing facilities.  
• The data on min. level of inventories is required in order to prevent shortages 
of deliveries. Clients can define this level according to their needs for sup-
plier quick response. Moreover in case when supplier keeps, so called safety 
stock the security of delivers is higher. At the same time costs of warehous-
ing of safety stock in one location are lower than by storing in a number of 
geographically dispersed facilities.  
• Maximal delivery lead time should be defined for every good what is cov-
ered by time-defined contract  (it is obligatory for supplier)   
• The average time of placing order and the average time of warehouse intake 
should be calculated in order to define the duration of auxlirary activities that 
might influence effectiveness of overall procurement process. 
•  The cost data regarding average wages of people working in purchas-
ing/procurement department and warehouse. 
• The cost of warehousing/ inventory carrying cost per unit per cubic meter per 
period of time- can be calculated on basis of warehouse fixed cost, cost of in-
frastructure, cost of energy divided by size of warehouse, easier way is to 
take a cost of rent by outsourcing of warehousing facility.

324 P. Golinska et al. 
• Percentage of loss by warehousing processes- this information is easy to ob-
tain because every legal entity is oblig ed to make at least once a year stock-
taking. 
• Level of interests by short time/working bank credit- it information is easy to 
obtained by standard bank procedures.  
The last information that should be defined by client is the duration of transac-
tion/contract he plans to sign. 
In the next section the procedure of EOV calculation and its application in web-
based sourcing system is presented. 
2.2   Algorithm for EOV Calculation 
Figure 3 presents the logic of EOV calculation.  At first the data (defined as in Figure 
2) should be entered into platform by a client. Calculation of order placement and 
order intake cost goes next (3). As the ne xt step (4) the suppliers can place their of-
fers. They should by every transaction publish the info about cost of transportation, 
unit price of goods/materials, delivery lead times and minimal size of purchase. The 
minimal value of order published by supplier cannot be bigger than the maximum size 
of order that was declared by customer fo r this transaction. The suppliers are aware 
that the above mentioned cost factors will be assessed based on the criterion of mini-
mal cost value. In step (5) the value of goods purchase cost is calculated as a multipli-
cation of demand in defined period and unit price of materials.  
In step (6) the initial EOV is calculated on the basis of equitation below:  
 
or
To
li
CCDEOV +
+⋅⋅= )(2  
 
where:  
D- demand 
Co- order placement cost 
CT –transportation cost 
ir- interest rate of short-time credit 
lo losses in inventory by warehousing  
 
In step (7) the initial EOV value is modified taking in consideration the maximum 
order value accepted by customer and minimal delivery size offered by supplier. The 
max. number of deliveries within the time-defined contract/transaction is calculated as 
conjunction of contract value from step 4 divided by min. size of order. The min. size 
of delivery is a result of declared by client demand in defined period divided by max. 
number of deliveries.  
The average inventory level (8) equals to the half of order size defined in previous 
steps within this particular time defined transaction. In step 9-13 the cost values are 
calculated, as follow:   
Cost of order in-taking in warehouse CE- equitation (1), modified from [4]

Application of EOV for Creation of Time-Defined Transactions 325 
 timeperiod_of
currencynd160
1,2C
60
tC max
SWEW
E ⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡⋅⋅⋅=
       
          (1) 
 
where: 
tEW average time of in-taking order to warehouse [minutes / order] 
60 conversion minutes into hours [minute/h] 
CSW average gross salary/wage of workers in warehouse [currency/month], 
1,2 20% of obligatory surplus to salary/month for health insurance 
160 number of working hours in month [h/month] 
ndmax  number of deliveries in predefined period of time [orders/period] 
 
Cost of order placement Co (acquiring)- equitation (2): 
 
__160
2,1
60
max ⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡⋅⋅⋅= timeofperiod
curencyndCtC SPOP
o
                      
(2) 
 
 
Fig. 3. EOV algorithm

326 P. Golinska et al. 
 
Fig. 3. (Continued) 
where: 
top average time of order placement [minutes / order] 
CSP average gross salary/wage of workers in purchasing department 
[currency/month], 
 
Inventory carrying cost CI -equitation (3): 
()() __365
30 ⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡⋅++⋅⋅= timeofperiod
currencyVClipQTC uwruAV
t
I
        
(3) 
 
where: 
Tt duration of time-defined contract [days /contract] 
365 number of days per year [days/year]

Application of EOV for Creation of Time-Defined Transactions 327 
QAV average level of stock 
pu price of unit 
ir interests of short-time  credit 
lo percentage of loss in warehouse 
Cw
3 cost of warehousing per cubic meter 
VU space requirements per stock unit 
 
Cost of replenishment CR- equitation (4):  
 
 timeperiod_of
currencyCC ER ⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡++⋅= oT CC                 (4) 
where: 
CT - average cost of transportation  
 
The total cost of contract/transaction is a sum of replenishment C R (equitation 3) cost, 
inventory carrying cost CI (4 equitation) and goods purchase cost itself.  
The output of the procedure is the classi fication of suppliers. The criterion for se-
lection is the minimal total contract’s cost.  
3   Application Potential- Conclusions  
Table 1 presents the advantages and disadvantages of proposed solution. Application 
of time-defined transaction based on EOV is suitable in case of repetitive, predictable 
demand with minor standard deviations in particular periods. In cases of variable 
demand (or even timely lack of demand) in particular period, usage of proposed solu-
tion might cause unwanted surpluses in level of inventories.  
It is possible to extend the replenishment cost equitation (4) by additional element 
regarding the cost of delays and deliveries that are not complete (shortages). Cus-
tomer can enter this data to e-sourcing system at the moment of EOV calculation.  
One of the biggest advantages of application of EOV for e-sourcing transaction is 
the fact, that client can update on hand the size of next deliveries of particular mate-
rial. It results in elimination of overstock.  
The time-defined contracts for deliveries of materials based on algorithm presented 
in Figure 3 allow taking in consideration a big number of factors. Moreover some of 
them are not cost factors like e.g. max. size of deliveries or min, level of stock inven-
tory. The EOV approach takes in consideration multi criteria in order to prequalify the 
potential suppliers. It helps to save time for customers by quantification of multi deci-
sions criteria.   
Proposed approach gives customer additional advantages by possibility to transfer 
the duty of keeping safety stock to supplier. However this option should be used only 
periodically in situation when customer is having lack of warehousing facilities due to 
changes in demand or seasonal financial limitations. Continuous usage of this option 
by every transaction might influences the optimum size of EOV by distortion of rela-
tion between inventory carrying cost and order placement cost.

328 P. Golinska et al. 
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of EOV application for the time-defined transaction by 
e-sourcing  
Advantages  Disadvantages  
-optimization of total sourcing cost  -need for predictable demand 
with small deviations in  
particular periods 
  
- higher reliability of deliveries 
due to safety stock by supplier 
 
 - rather big data requiremen t
always available) 
 
- definition of maxi. order size 
allows to find the optimum 
solution regarding the limitation of 
particular client 
  
 - procedure is based on  
extreme values of upper and 
lower limits of particular  
criteria 
-multi-criteria classification of 
supplier based on particular cost 
components  
 -supplier input data are fixed 
for particular period of time   
   
 
The proposed approach requires a quite big number of data, however the way it is 
defined is rather simple, so user should not have problems to obtain it. 
All of suppliers’ assessments in proposed approach are based on input data entered 
by customer. It quality of calculations depends fully on customer. Very often extreme 
values of indicators might be entered that not fully response to reality. However en-
tered data is used for all assessment of supplier for particular customer’s transaction 
so the distortion in outputs should be reduced.  
Last disadvantage of time-defined transactions based on EOV is the fact that all in-
put data is entered into system as a crisp numbers (without standard deviations or 
intervals). This weakness can by eliminated by additional e-sourcing system function-
ality as ranking of suppliers. 
The application of proposed approach is depended on the trust between participants 
of supplier network. The establishment of trust [2] in Web-based services is a major 
problem. The publishing of supplier references which includes the evaluation sum-
mary of the service is a must by application of EOV approach by time-defined trans-
action. The service registry should deliver reference information about providers of a 
specific supplier. 
The further research steps will include the application of agent-based technology to 
the proposed approach. Agent-based system architecture provides an interesting per-
spective for integration of the supply chain due the fact that they are able to generate, 
process, store, filter, correlate, broadcast, and route information for real-time coordi-
nation and decision making. Agent technologies can be used to facilitate and control 
the scope, the time, and the frequency of information sharing based on specific ar-
rangement and possible impact on each partners. Agent technology is the preferable 
technology for enabling a flexible and dynamic coordination of spatially distributed 
entities [6]. The mentioned above characteristics suits well e-sourcing environment.

Application of EOV for Creation of Time-Defined Transactions 329 
Agents’ technology suits well to heterogeneous information environment where a 
number of participants need to share a big number of data from inconsistent IT sys-
tems. E-sourcing process involves a big number of business partners with different 
data standards and various IT applications. In order to improve the negotiation proc-
ess among them based on EOV approach (see fig.3) agents will be created represent-
ing particular parties.  
References 
1. Brehm, N., Golinska, P.: Engineering web service markets for federated business applica-
tions. In: Omatu, S., Rocha, M.P., Bravo, J., Fernández, F., Corchado, E., Bustillo, A.,  
Corchado, J.M. (eds.) IWANN 2009. LNCS, vol. 5518, pp. 366–373. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2009) 
2. Jøsang, A., Ismail, R., Boyd, C.: A Survey of Trust and Reputation Systems for Online Ser-
vice Provision Decision Support Systems. Decision Support Systems 43(2), 618–644 (2007) 
3. Krzyzaniak, S.: Podstawy zarz ądzania zapasami w przykładach. Instytut Logistyki i 
Magazynowania, Poznan (2005) 
4. Oleskow, J., Fertsch, M.: Lot sizing methods- review and comparative analysis, develop-
ment and advantages arising from GA application. In: Proceedings of 3rd International Con-
ference on Advances in Production Engineering, Warsaw APE 2004, pp. 83–92 (2004) 
5. Stevenson, M., Hendry, L.C., Kingsman, B.G.: A review of production planning and  
control: the applicability of key concepts to the make-to-order industry. International Journal 
of Production Research 43(5), 869–898 (2005) 
6. Villa, A.: Emerging trends in large-scale supply chain management. International Journal of 
Production Research 40(15), 3487–3498 (2002)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 330–339, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Ontology as a Tool for the IT Management  
Standards Support 
Adam Czarnecki and Cezary Orłowski 
Gdansk University of Technology, Faculty of Management and Economics,  
Department of Information Technology Management,  
ul. Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233 Gdańsk, Poland 
{Adam.Czarnecki,Cezary.Orlowski}@zie.pg.gda.pl 
Abstract. In this paper the authors discuss the initial idea of using ontologies to 
model requirements of the standards that support IT management processes. 
The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) is set as an example. 
A need for transition from the generic model do the organization-specific one  
is indicated. The described example serves as a ground for considering the use-
fulness of such modeling approach in the wider spectrum of projects in the  
production engineering/process management fields. 
Keywords: ontology engineering, TOGAF, enterprise architecture, IT project 
management. 
1   Introduction 
There is no single key for successful accomplishment of the information technology 
(IT) project. However there are some factors that may increase the probability of 
completing the project within an earlier established measures of time, cost and—last 
but not least—quality. One of such factors is to support the project with a widely 
approved standard that is compliant with the organization’s needs. 
Let’s consider an organization which needs to reflect its business operation model in 
the integrated IT system. Such approach requires a phase of data, information and 
knowledge identification within a company. That leads to the information flow recogni-
tion and description. This step, however, cannot be taken without charting company’s 
organizational units. Now, moving further, one must determine what data/information is 
exchanged with company’s ‘outer world’, that is mostly its close environment. Devel-
opment of such enterprise information model is a complex process and its difficulty 
rises along with the company’s size. One may ask whether such model is really needed. 
The ‘yes’ answer can be inferred from two rather opposite approaches to company’s 
computerization—1. deploying monolithic management support IT systems such as 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems or 2. using Service-Oriented Architecture 
(SOA) model. In the first approach successful deployment relies on the through audit of 
the company’s workflow (and flow of the information), because the IT system must be 
capable of encompassing practically all of the data required for business operations. 
Such issues as data types and formats are not crucial as the conformance should be

Ontology as a Tool for the IT Management Standards Support 331 
provided by the homogenous ERP system. The latter approach (SOA) requires not only 
processes specification, but also data definitions in order to provide interfaces between 
all the services for the information exchange. 
To provide an integrated information management throughout the organization one 
can adapt an enterprise architecture (EA) a pproach. It is a complex and an iterative 
process (defined further in this paper). Much of this complexity is caused by a number 
of tightly related documents/artifacts that are being created during all phases and 
which must be managed (e.g. configuration management) in order to keep the EA  
up-to-date. That is why a widely accepted standard for Enterprise Architecture dep-
loyment and maintenance is highly recommended as guidelines for these activities. 
An Enterprise Architecture is a particular case of the complex IT management 
project. Other examples are methods of software engineering, especially in the area of 
defining and improving development processes. All of these activities can be supported 
by a number of standards. However applicability of these standards may cause prob-
lems, mostly because of the wide scope or depth of the addressed issues and the need 
for tailoring or combining such ‘out-of-the-box’ solutions. This may be a premise to 
consider a formal description of the knowledge about the standard/method in use and 
the organization that tries to adapt it as an aid for the project team that is responsible 
for standard/method deployment in the given enterprise. Authors of this paper suggest 
considering an ontology as a tool for this goal. 
In the following paragraphs of this paper an ‘enterprise architecture’ term will be in-
troduced along with The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOFAG) as a standard 
that supports the EA. Also ontologies and their applicability in the context of TOGAF 
are to be presented. The last section will be dedicated to the brief discussion on potential 
roles of ontologies in describing development/manufacturing processes. 
2   Enterprise Architecture 
The Enterprise Architecture (EA) can be described (attributive definition) as the orga-
nizing logic for key business process and IT capabilities reflecting the integration and 
standardization requirements of the firm’s operating model [14]. The objective defini-
tion denotes a formal description of the phenomena given in the attributive definition. 
There is also a functional approach to the EA which indicates tasks and skills essen-
tial for managing the subject of the attributive definition [8]. 
The term ‘enterprise’ should also be precisely explained to avoid confusion. TO-
GAF Version 9 defines an enterprise as any collection of organizations that has 
a common set of goals [10]. There are also examples that clarify the definition: 
a government agency, a whole corporation, a division of a corporation, a single  
department, or a chain of geographically distant organizations linked together by 
common ownership. 
So what is a purpose of developing and then maintaining an Enterprise Architecture? 
One of the purposes is to gain a picture of the enterprise that would be formally framed. 
An enterprise can already benefit from the EA  at the elaboration phase as the need for 
formal and precise description requires data, processes and structures to be defined. And 
when something is defined and measured, than it can be managed. That leads to the 
second goal: EA development increases the degree at which organization—seen as a

332 A. Czarnecki and C. Orłowski 
information processing system—can be managed. In this sequence the third goal is set 
on optimizing activities, e.g. better business/IT alignment, better IT decision making, 
better strategic planning or cost reduction [13]. 
As it was stated in the introduction, such organization model development as the 
EA is a difficult task. It requires an adoption of the formal description method,  
that allows not only a wide and deep insight to the organization, but also is also upda-
teable as the enterprise changes throughout the time. One that would wish to  
develop a formal Enterprise Architecture can work out own his/her path to this goal. 
However, there are ready-to-use methods that support EA development. The Open 
Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) [10] is one of them. The next section of the 
paper discuses this approach. 
3   TOGAF 
The state-of-the-art in the business IT application area indicates needs such as:  
software development methods, project management, models for organization and 
process development and evaluation. Although there are methods that give a complex 
support for managing: development processes, a manufacturer and client’s require-
ments acquisition, they alone address rath er a narrow spectrum of the enterprise. 
There is a need for creating more holistic models of the enterprise manufacturing and 
management processes and the IT systems that support them. To do so one can use a 
framework for the IT system or architecture development such as The Open Group 
Architecture Framework (TOGAF), Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI), 
Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) or Control Objectives for In-
formation (COBIT). 
3.1   Why TOGAF? 
There is currently a number of standards for the EA development. Some are widely 
supported by consortia and Open Source groups (e.g. GAME, GERAM, TOGAF), 
there are commercial frameworks (IAF, OBASHI, Zachman Framework) or govern-
ment-based (FEAF, DoDAF). 
Authors would like to discuss the TOGAF (Version 9). There are three explana-
tions for this choice. First, it is quite commonly used—a world-wide research [13] 
among 173 organizations that has adapted EA approach has shown, that 51% of them 
used TOGAF (ver. 8 or 9) and 52% consid ered to do so. The second place was held 
by Zachman Framework (24%), which is also recommended as a support method for 
TOGAF. A second premise to chose TOGAF is that it gives not only a description of 
what should be achieved, but also provides some guidelines how to do it. On the third 
reason is licensing—TOGAF is free to use. 
3.2   Contents of TOGAF 
TOGAF [10] addresses four main architectural domains: business, data, application 
and technology, and there are six main parts of the framework:

Ontology as a Tool for the IT Management Standards Support 333 
─ Architecture Development Method (ADM)—a description of phases of the itera-
tive cycle (Fig. 1). 
─ ADM guidelines and techniques—applying iteration to the ADM, a usage at the 
different enterprise levels. 
─ Architecture content framework—specifies the content metamodel, artifacts,  
deliverables and building blocks. 
─ Enterprise Continuum and tools—a specific repository of architectures and  
solutions. 
─ Reference models—foundation architecture and integrated information infra-
structure. 
─ Architecture capability framework—reference material on how to manage  
organization structures, processes, roles, responsibilities and skills. 
 
Fig. 1. TOGAF—Architecture Development Cycle [10] 
The TOGAF document is quite voluminous (700+ pages not including other refe-
renced papers). Chapter 3 introduces 90 essential definitions as a prerequisite to the 
main part of the framework and there are 93 supplemental terms given in the Appen-
dix A. The core metamodel artifacts list consists of 45 elements. There are 35 objects 
in the content metamodel. Most of them have attributes (often more than one) and can 
be related one to another (more than 100 relationships). In the result we get 
a knowledge at the high level of complexity that an architect or, most likely, the EA 
team has to harness. 
Requirements
Management
A.
Architecture 
Vision
E.
Opportunities
And
Solutions
G.
Implementation
Governance
C.
Information
Systems
Architecture
H.
Architecture
Change
Management
B.
Business
Architecture
F.
Migration 
Planning
D.
Technology 
Architecture
Preliminary

334 A. Czarnecki and C. Orłowski 
The efficient system for the EA standard application assurance can consist of: staff 
training, monitoring of changes, giving traceability to the documents and their links to 
other objects/artifacts that are present in the enterprise. The latter requirements are 
difficult to apply in the classic hierarchic repository (even with meta tags) and a need 
for richer semantics should be claimed. The use of ontologies is proposed as a solution. 
3.3   Methods Supplemental to TOGAF 
TOGAF provides only a framework for the EA. It’s efficiency may be increased by 
extending it with a project or organization management method, especially one that 
pertains to the IT domain. The results of the research that was mentioned earlier in 
this paper (see: 3.1 Why TOGAF?) show, that TOGAF was supplemented by (or 
supplemented) methods such as ITIL (31% of answers), RUP (19%), COBIT (18%), 
PRINCE2 (14%) or PMBOK (9%) to mention only the most frequent. 
Having additional method also means that the list of definitions, terms, artifacts, 
objects, relationships mentioned in section 3.2 significantly expands. It enriches the 
knowledge on the EA development, but simultaneously makes it even more proble-
matic to encompass all issues. This is a next premise to declare this knowledge using 
formal and computational method, for instance: ontology. 
4   Ontology Engineering 
To prepare a formal description of the standard’s foundation and business operations 
of their informational aspect—in order to provide IT project managers with tools and 
methods—one should focus on development processes that form an ‘ontology engi-
neering’ discipline. Details on ontology engineering are given later in this paper. First, 
the term ‘ontology’ is explained, then its application for TOGAF purposes is briefly 
presented. This serves as an example that authors would like to apply in the agent-
based system along with knowledge bases that would assist managers in measuring 
projects’ entropy (see: [6]). 
4.1   What Is an Ontology? 
One of less formal ontology definitions (in the computer science, not in philosophy) 
states that it a set of precisely defined terms (vocabulary) about a specific domain and 
accepted by this domain’s community [1]. Ontology provides the means to classify 
objects, to give these classifications names and labels, and to define the kind of prop-
erties and relationships they can be assigned [7]. 
There are more formal, precise definitions. Authors would like to mention the 
Karlsruhe Ontology Model as it is presented in [4]. It consists of the five definitions. 
Definition 1 (Core Ontology). A core ontology is a structure 
൑ோሻ (1)

Ontology as a Tool for the IT Management Standards Support 335 
consisting of: 
─ two disjoint sets ܥand ܴwhose elements are called concepts identifiers and re-
lation identifiers (or concepts and relations for short), 
─ a partial order ൑஼ on ܥcalled concept hierarchy or taxonomy, 
─ a function ܥcalled signature, where ۄwith 
Թ , domain ሻ, and range ሻ, 
─ a partial order ൑ோ on ൑ோ, called relation hierarchy, where ଶ  ฻
ଶሻ and ଶሻ. 
Definition 2 (Axioms).  Let ܮbe a logical language. An L-axiom system for a core 
ontology is a pair 
ሻ (2) 
where: 
─ ܫܣis a set whose elements are called axiom indentifiers, 
─ ܮis a mapping. 
The elements of ሻ are called axioms. ܵis considered to be part of the  
language ܮ .
Definition 3 (Knowledge Base). A knowledge base is a structure 
ோሻ (3) 
consisting of: 
─ two disjoint sets ܥand ܴas defined before, 
─ a set ܫwhose elements are called instance identifiers (or instances for short), 
─ a function ሻ called concept instantiation, 
─ a function ଶሻ with ሻ൯, for all Թ . 
The function is called relation instantiation. 
Definition 4 (Lexicon). A lexicon for an ontology is a structure 
ூሻ (4) 
consisting of: 
─ three sets ூ whose elements are called signs for concepts, relations, and 
instances, resp., 
─ a relation ܥcalled lexical reference for concepts, ோ and ூ 
analogously. 
Definition 5 (Ontology).  An ontology ܱis therefore defined through the following 
tuple: 
ሻ (5) 
consisting of: 
─ the core ontology ܵ ,
─ the L-axiom system ܣ ,

336 A. Czarnecki and C. Orłowski 
─ the knowledge base ܤܭ ,
─ the lexicon ݔ݁ܮ .
The practical purposes for ontology development are [5]: 
─ to share common understanding of the structure of information among people or 
software agents, 
─ to enable reuse of domain knowledge, 
─ to make domain assumptions explicit, 
─ to separate domain knowledge from operational knowledge, 
─ to analyze domain knowledge. 
The most prominent application of ontologies—as seen today—is a component of the 
semantic web architecture [2]. The role of the ontology in the Semantic Web ‘layer 
cake’ is to provide vocabularies and shared meanings to the web content. 
More on the ontology languages, tools and applications can be found in [3]. 
4.2   Role of Ontology in the EA Development 
As it was stated earlier in this paper, authors would like to propose a creation of an 
ontology-based TOGAF (and, perhaps, IT project management method that would 
support it) model. It would be a generic ontology, applicable to any organization  
interested in formal Enterprise Architecture development that refers to TOGAF guide-
lines. A knowledge engineer’s task is easier since the release of TOGAF Version 9. It 
introduces a content metamodel for architecture framework (see: [9]). It is a collection 
of verbal descriptions, tables, figures and UML class diagrams that present terms and 
their relationships in the ADM domain. An efficient use of such document in order to 
capture the structure of EA and TOGAF itself can be questioned. However, this me-
tamodel serves as a convenient starting point to develop an ontology. 
Such TOGAF ontology has been developed by the Working Group [11]. It  
addresses version 8 of the framework, which was not equipped with a content meta-
model. Figure 2 presents the graphical representation of main classes taxonomy 
(class-subclass relation). The root of all the terms (classes) is owl:THING—it is al-
ways a parent class in the OWL ontology. 
TOGAF generic ontology should be designed as a template that can be applied to 
any EA developing organization. As the ontology would be fed with knowledge on 
a given enterprise (especially these regarding four main domains: business, data, ap-
plication and technology), there would be a transition process from the generic to the 
(enterprise-)specific ontology. In fact, it is a natural process when ADM cycle is in 
progress (Fig. 1). 
On figure 3 one can see main terms of the TOGAF ontology presented as contain-
ers. The Enterprise class has been highlighted with an included instance of the same 
name. It depicts—as it was proposed in the preceding paragraph—that the ontology 
has a capability of being adjusted to the specific organization. The same figure shows 
other semantic relations than class-subclass in the TOGAF ontology (as arrows). 
Their intensity (multiplicity) is denoted by the thickness of the lines.

Ontology as a Tool for the IT Management Standards Support 337 
 
Fig. 2. An ontology—TOGAF classes ([11] presented by authors of the paper in Protégé) 
 
Fig. 3. TOGAF ontology—main classes, instances and relations ([11] presented by authors of 
the paper in Protégé)

338 A. Czarnecki and C. Orłowski 
It is clear that the generic ontology development is only a first step towards ex-
ploiting the formal knowledge on TOGAF in the organizations adopting an EA.  
Ontology would only be one of the layers of the system, as it proposed in the Seman-
tic Web concept [2]. 
5   Ontology Support for Development/Manufacturing Standards 
The goal of presenting TOGAF and ontology model of this framework was to initiate 
a research on usefulness of a developing semantic knowledge structures of technology 
and management standards. 
The next phase of the research would be focused on the attempts to apply the on-
tology metamodels to a wider range of the development/manufacturing processes. 
And if this goal is successful, in the next phase one would try to capture the whole 
enterprise (there was a TOVE project [12] trying to achieve it, but seems to be discon-
tinued for the time being). 
6   Summary 
Some claim that the great thing about standards is there are so many to choose from. 
But when the selection phase is over, there is another challenge awaiting: how to 
successfully execute implementation of the standard within organization? This  
requires a whole project team to understand and apply to the standard’s ‘letter and 
spirit’. In case of the such complex process guidelines as these found in the IT project 
management area one should consider developing and then using ontology as 
a metamodel of the given standard or guidelines. Such metamodel should have the 
adaptability and reusability for sake of all the organizations that wish to have their 
processes in conformance with the ontologically described standard. 
This paper is a result of the research on applying the intelligent methods for the IT 
evaluation founded by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education. 
References 
1. Aufaure, M.A., LeGrand, B., Soto, M., Bennacer, N.: Metadata and Ontology-Based  
Semantic Web Mining. In: Taniar, D., Rahayu, J.W. (eds.) Web Semantics Ontology, pp. 
259–295. Idea Group Publishing, Hershey (2006) 
2. Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., Lassila, O.: The Semantic Web. Scientific American Maga-
zine (2001) 
3. Czarnecki, A., Orłowski, C.: Potential Appli cability of Ontologies for the Evaluation of 
Information Technology. In: Grzech, A., Borzemski, L., Świątek, J., Wilmowska, Z. (eds.) 
Information Systems Architecture and Technol ogy. Information Systems and Computer 
Communication Networks, pp. 53–60. Wrocław University of Technology, Wrocław 
(2007) 
4. Ehrig, M.: Ontology Alignment: Bridging the Semantic Gap. Springer, New York (2007) 
5. Noy, F.N., McGuiness, D.L.: Ontology Development 101: A Guide to Creating Your First 
Ontology. Stanford Knowledge Systems Lab. Technical Report KSL-01-05 and Stanford 
Medical Informatics Technical Report SMI-2001-0880, Stanford, USA (2001)

Ontology as a Tool for the IT Management Standards Support 339 
6. Orłowski, C., Ziółkowski, A.: Verification of agent system for IT project management 
support. In: Wilimowska, Z., Borzemski, L., Grzech, A., Świątek, J. (eds.) Information 
systems architecture and technology—IT technologies in knowledge oriented management 
process. Oficyna Wydawnicza Politechniki Wrocławskiej, Wrocław (2009) 
7. Passin, T.B.: Explorer’s Guide to the Semantic Web. Manning Publ., Greenwich (2004) 
8. Sobczak, A.: Dlaczego architektura korporacyjna? ArchitekturaKorporacyjna.pl (2007)  
(in Polish), http://www.architekturakorporacyjna.pl/index.php/ 
2007/08/01/dlaczego-architektura-korporacyjna/ 
9. Sobczak, A.: Modele i metamodele w architekturze korporacyjnej. In: Proceedings to The 
Organizations Support Systems Conference. Akademia Ekonomiczna w Katowi cach, Ka-
towice (2008), http://www.swo.ae.katowice.pl/_pdf/396.pdf (in Polish) 
10. The Open Group Architecture Framework, Version 9. The Open Group (2009) 
11. TOGAF 8 Ontology draft. SOA Working Group, http://www.opengroup.org/ 
projects/soa-ontology/doc.tpl?gdid=11367 
12. TOVE Ontology Project, http://www.eil.utoronto.ca/enterprise-
modelling/tove/index.html 
13. Varnus, J., Panaich, N.: TOGAF 9 Survey Results Presentation. The Open Group (2009), 
https://www.opengroup.org/conference-live/uploads/40/20081/ 
Mon_-_am_-_3_-_Varnus.pdf 
14. Weill, P.: Innovating with Information Systems: What do the most agile firms in the world 
do? In: Presentation at Sixth e-Business Conference, Barcelona, March 27 (2007)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 340–350, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Methods of Incomplete and Uncertain Knowledge 
Acquisition in the Knowledge Processing Environment 
Cezary Orłowski, Tomasz Sitek, and Rafał Rybacki 
Gdańsk University of Technology, Department of Management and Economics,  
ul. Narutowicza 11/12, Gdansk, Poland 
{cezary.orlowski,tomasz.sitek}@zie.pg.gda.pl,  
rafal.rybacki@gmail.pl 
Abstract. The authors in this paper present a concept of the environment to  
acquire and process knowledge about information technology. This solution is 
part of a project of which the objective is to build a system for the evaluation of 
IT tools and methodologies. Knowledge within this domain is always either  
uncertain or incomplete. Therefore, the authors focused on designing a dedi-
cated algorithm for its acquisition and processing. One of the main factors de-
termining success in such conditions is effective collaboration with experts. An 
important part of the research on this problem was done based on an application 
built for this purpose. The application was used for several experiments which 
were expected to verify theoretical assumptions. This paper is the documenta-
tion of one such experiment. The authors’ priority was to identify real and  
potential problems through collaboration with invited domain experts. 
Keywords: knowledge base, uncertain knowledge, reasoning, expert system, 
information technology. 
1   Introduction 
The development of information technology nowadays creates opportunities for every 
organization or company. It gives the chance to select the appropriate solutions for  
the maturity level of business processes and their state of computerization. It is no 
longer possible to act in an effective way using a certain number of separate, non-
cooperative applications. Business structures expect the IT environment to provide 
safe and instant flow of all information resources for the support of organization man-
agement. The selection of these systems is usually preceded by a preliminary analysis 
of the existing infrastructure and available market offer. All products which are taken 
into consideration should be evaluated [1]. To perform such an assessment it is  
necessary to apply a model dedicated to the domain of information technology.  
As the IT domain is very wide, the authors’ research focused only on technologies 
dedicated to supporting project management. It was assumed [2] that the selection of 
the most adequate tool or method depends on three aspects: maturity of own organiza-
tion, customer characteristics and entropy of  the project. Each of these is treated by 
the authors as a variable in the algorithm.  The algorithm describes possible actions of

Methods of Incomplete and Uncertain Knowledge Acquisition 341 
project leaders in the process of the selec tion of the most adequate method/tool for a 
certain project. It is the base for the multi-layered model of the selection of IT meth-
ods and tools, which makes use of the mentioned variables for rule-based knowledge 
representation with the use of fuzzy modeling. 
For the purpose of the developed model it is necessary to gain knowledge about the 
project and its environment. However, knowledge may be either distributed or uncer-
tain and incomplete. Such characteristics of knowledge are the result of the large 
entropy of the project environment. IT projects very often become a sequence of  
disordered events which are difficult to manage [3].  
Therefore, the next sections present the mechanisms for acquiring such knowledge 
for the model and the system for information technology evaluation. The authors 
focused in the paper on processes of cooperation between experts and knowledge 
engineers.  
2   Research Area and Objectives 
The primary research (as well as utilitarian) objective of the authors’ team is the 
building of a system for information technology management. 
It is assumed that such a solution will be dedicated to the selection of methods and 
tools for IT project management support. This will be a knowledge-base solution. 
Therefore, its built-in mechanisms for facts/rules acquisition and processing must be a 
key component [4]. 
As it was mentioned in the introduction, knowledge of this domain is usually char-
acterized by some kind of imperfection. Therefore, we may have to deal with [5]: 
 
• incomplete knowledge, 
• uncertain knowledge, 
• imprecise knowledge. 
 
However, in most cases knowledge engineers must face more than one of these prob-
lems (for example, an expert may not have complete knowledge, while he also cannot 
be completely sure of his knowledge). It is important to take this aspect of knowledge 
into account already at the stage of selecting or designing an appropriate tool to build 
the mentioned system. It must be able to deal with knowledge imperfection because it is 
expected to support either the process of rules/facts acquisition or chaining procedures. 
It turns out that incompleteness of knowledge may be the result of either gaps on 
the specialists’ side or the low efficiency of applied knowledge engineering methods 
(e.g. too long sessions make experts tired and impatient). In such conditions, the main 
priority is to design such a logic of dialogue with an expert that knowledge-acquiring 
sessions are optimal due to the efficiency criteria. Efficiency is defined as the number 
of rules/facts added to the base in a given unit of time. What is important is that inter-
action ‘the system-person who enters the knowledge’ must be maintenance-free. It is 
assumed that there will be many experts involved in the project. Therefore,  
co-operation with them must be organized in the way that no personal support of 
knowledge engineers is needed. In the context of these requirements the goal of the 
authors is to build an environment which will have:

342 C. Orłowski, T. Sitek, and R. Rybacki 
• optimal logic of the knowledge acquisition process - due to the criterion of time 
and other hard-to-measure or not-measurable criteria such as easiness of entering 
knowledge to the base, 
• an ergonomic and fault-tolerant user interface; an expert should be supported by 
the system at every step. 
 
For the purpose of the verification of the developed concept, a dedicated application 
was built. The authors expected such a tool to be helpful in analyzing and controlling 
every step of the information acquisition process. The application is described in the 
next section. Then the authors present details of an experiment which was carried out 
at Gdansk University of Technology. A group of knowledge engineers, domain  
experts and specialists in methods of reasoning were invited and involved. 
3   The System for Acquiring and Processing Knowledge 
This section concerns the concept of a designed knowledge-base system. The  
mentioned application is an expert system, which aims to support decision-making 
processes on the basis of acquired knowledge, knowledge processing algorithms and 
procedures for determining the response. 
3.1   Knowledge-Base Structure 
The most basic functional unit of knowledge is a case. Every case contains informa-
tion about a real or simulated situation. Each case is described by two sets of facts: 
facts that describe the situation and facts that point to a suggested solution to the con-
sidered problem. 
Each case is described by a vector of input variables. The corresponding solution is 
determined by a vector of output variables. So, the unit of knowledge – the case – is 
therefore an relation between two vectors of values. Additionally, input variables can 
be described using attribute weights, which express the level of significance of each 
variable in the decision-making process. An example case has been shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. The case structure 
Input variables Output variables 
A (1) B (1) C (2) X Y 
a1 b 1 c 1 x 1 y 1 
 
where: A (1) stands for the variable A with the weight amounting to 1. 
The case described in Table 1 may be interpreted as a rule in the form of a logical 
implication, which means: 
IF (A = a1) AND (B = b1) AND (C = c1) THEN (X = x1) AND (Y = y1)       (1)

Methods of Incomplete and Uncertain Knowledge Acquisition 343 
The second functional unit of knowledge  in the considered  concept is the adapta-
tion rule. These rules may support the process of introducing the knowledge as well 
as boosting the accuracy of reasoning when seeking a solution. The purpose of adap-
tation rules is to fit the knowledge stored in a set of cases to the query. These rules are 
introduced in order to capture the relations hip between the changes in the states of 
input and output variables. An example of the implementation of adaptation rules is 
presented in Table 2. 
Table 2. An example of adaptation rules 
Input variables Output variables 
A B C X Y 
a1 →  a2   x1 → x1  
 
The interpretation of such an adaptation rule should be: 
Assuming the constant character of other variables, if the value of A changes from 
a 1 to a 2, then the value of output variable X changes from x 1 to x 1.. 
3.2   Knowledge-Base Content 
A decision supporting functionality cannot be executed unless the knowledge is intro-
duced to the knowledge-base. When a state of complete information is provided, the 
contents of the knowledge base may have the nature of: 
 
• incomplete knowledge, 
• uncertain knowledge. 
 
The incompleteness of the knowledge is expressed by the number of cases, which is 
less than the maximum number of variable combinations. 
The system also allows for the introduction of knowledge in the form of cases with 
limited degrees of belief which describe both the entire rule and every specific fact. 
The proposed implementation of uncertain knowledge assigns a value of confidence 
for every input variable. This has been shown in table 3. 
Table 3. Structure of a case with uncertain knowledge 
Input variables Output variables Degree 
of belief  
A P(A) B P(B) C P(C) X P(X) Y P(Y) 
90% a 1 100% b 1 90% c 1 75% x 1 100% y 1 60% 
 
where P(X) – the function determining the confidence level of variable X .

344 C. Orłowski, T. Sitek, and R. Rybacki 
3.3   The Procedure for Reasoning  
The system achieves its purpose – the support of the decision-making process – 
through analyzing the query and suggesting the best possible solution. The query sent 
to the system is determined by the vector of input variables. 
The process of reasoning consists of two steps. In the first step, the best-matching 
case is searched. This is achieved by comp aring the query with every case stored in 
the knowledge-base and extracting the Euclidean distance of every pair on the basis of 
normalized values of input variables of each of the input vectors. The best match is 
determined by the lowest value of such a calculated distance. This is the realization of 
the nearest neighbor algorithm. 
If the confidence levels are being in use, system is treating them as modifiers that 
decrease the general solution confidence level. 
The idea of the second step is to modify the found best-matching case in order to 
make it fit better to the query. This is done by analyzing all adaptation rules stored in 
the knowledge-base and trying to apply them to the case found in the first step. Then, 
the Euclidean distance between such modified cases and the query are calculated. 
Provided that the value of the distance is lower than the distance found in the first 
step, the best set of adaptation rules is a pplied to the selected case and such a modi-
fied case is thought to be the final solution. If the Euclidean distance between the 
selected case and the query is zero, it means that the system has found a case which is 
identical to the query and the solution of this case will be suggested as the final reso-
lution for the query. The adaptation rules are being applied in the order of entering to 
base. Therefore all of them are always taken into consideration during reasoning.  
3.4   Implementation of the System 
The concept of an expert system presented in this section has been introduced as the 
application called EXPERT2. The application has been implemented in Software-as-a-
Service technology, so that it enables a multiple number of users to work with the 
application and cooperate simultaneously. The functionalities of the created software 
include such capabilities as: 
 
• knowledge-base structure modification, 
• adding cases with a degree of confidence, 
• adding adaptation rules with a degree of confidence, 
• automatic building of adaptation rules based on inserted cases, 
• performing queries in order to get problem solution support. 
 
There are also additional features that ease management and ensure the proper func-
tioning of adaptation rules. When the option is selected, all duplicate and conflicting 
adaptation rules will be removed from the analysis. The use of adaptation rules can be 
switched off so that the second step of reasoning is not being performed. The ability 
to control these options can be made through the tab with the main preview of the 
knowledge base. It is shown in figure 1. 
The following figures present the tabs that allow the cases to be defined and the 
queries to be processed.

Methods of Incomplete and Uncertain Knowledge Acquisition 345 
 
Fig. 1. EXPERT2 – a preview of knowledge-base content 
 
Fig. 2. EXPERT2 – the query processing tab 
3.5   Test Results 
In order to verify the accuracy of the chosen approach, a survey was conducted. The 
problem concerned in the survey had alread y been pre-identified and resolved, so the 
correctness of every response was able to be assessed. The study was performed on a 
sample of 100.000 queries, with varying degrees of completeness of the knowledge 
base. Two concepts were tested: 
 
• NN – reasoning on the basis of cases only, 
• NNA – reasoning on the basis of cases and automatically-built adaptation rules. 
The result of the survey is shown in Figure 4.

346 C. Orłowski, T. Sitek, and R. Rybacki 
 
Fig. 3. EXPERT2 – the tab for adding cases 
 
Fig. 4. The result of the effectiveness study

Methods of Incomplete and Uncertain Knowledge Acquisition 347 
Accuracy was measured by calculating the number of correct solutions suggested 
by the system compared to the overall number of queries. When analyzing the chart 
above, it appears that the concept of adaptatio n rules in an expert system is practically 
justified due to the increase in accuracy. 
4   Verification of the Developed Approach for the Reasoning and 
Acquisition of Knowledge in the IT Domain 
The idea of the application presented in th e previous section was determined by the 
need to verify the authors’ (theoretical, so  far) concept. As their research focused on 
mechanisms for obtaining and processing knowledge, it was therefore decided to 
organize and perform a special experiment. 
4.1   Assumptions for the Experiment 
Such an experiment was arranged as several working sessions with the participation 
of experts. It was intended to verify the approach and guide the way for further work. 
The experiment was planned as part of an ongoing scientific research project  
conducted with the IT department (called the IT Support Organization) of a large 
international financial company. The project aims to build a tool which allows the 
identification of prognostic factors which influence the evolution of IT support or-
ganizations. Success in obtaining the desired results depends largely on the quantity 
and quality of available knowledge about occurred and probable changes in organiza-
tion structures. In particular, there are some  collected rules which describe the impact 
of the organization’s initial state and the possible processes of transition on its final 
state (measured on a scale of maturity levels, as well as in CMMI methodology). 
Because of the high complexity of the project (calculated by the number of possi-
ble parameters to be analyzed), it was agreed that the domain should be confined for 
the first experiment. Based on that assumption the authors focused on the preprocess-
ing of one variable - the level of maturity of the organization. The general form of 
rules was accepted as follows: 
 
IF <initial level> AND < transition processes> THEN <end level>            (2) 
 
where all variables are expressed on a scale of 1-5, which corresponds to the level of 
organization maturity.  
All these agreements were implemented in the tool presented in previous sections. 
4.2   The Experiment – Participants and Schedule 
The experiment was carried out in the Laboratory for Research on Information Tech-
nologies at Gdansk University of Technology. Representatives of three organizations 
agreed to take part in it: 
 
• Knowledge engineers from the Department of Information Technology Manage-
ment (including the authors), 
• Specialists in algorithms of imperfect knowledge processing,

348 C. Orłowski, T. Sitek, and R. Rybacki 
• Domain experts from the IT support organization, with knowledge about the proc-
esses determining changes in levels of maturity in such entities. 
 
The schedule of the meeting was divided into three main parts: 
 
• introducing participants to topics of research, presentations of established assump-
tions, 
• adjusting the system, correction of the initial structure of the knowledge base,  
selection of limit values, 
• four sessions (consultations) with experts, during each one additional features 
available to the expert were introduced; the authors aim was to verify the validity 
of each of the four approaches to knowledge acquisition. 
 
Session #1 was carried out in order to gain only certain knowledge from the invited 
specialists. They were provided with an interface for entering only case-type rules and 
were instructed to input only knowledge without any doubts. All uncertain cases were 
rejected. It was also assumed that the experts were starting with an empty knowledge 
base and beginning to fill it at their own rate. During this process, reasoning was 
launched several times in order to verify expected outcomes. It also gave some over-
view of how the system works with different levels of base completeness. An impor-
tant conclusion was that the experts decided to finish this session after entering quite a 
low number of rules (compared to the goal - a full knowledge base, which should be 
the consequence of all combinations of input variables). The experts considered only 
a small part of their knowledge as fully certain and ready for implementation.  
Session #2 entered the concept of adaptation rules. It had to answer the following 
question: is it easier for an expert to enter many cases or to focus on an alternative 
way of expressing knowledge – entering a few rules that describe general principles 
regarding transition between states of variables? This new functionality determined a 
need to correct the existing knowledge (previously added in session #1). Some cases 
were replaced by adequate adaptation rules. The experts did the modifications in sev-
eral iterations and analyzed different answers received from the system. Again, only 
certain knowledge was taken into consideration. The conclusion after this part of the 
experiment was quite unexpected. The experts found adaptation knowledge too diffi-
cult to express. Therefore, the proce ss of knowledge acquisition becomes too  burden-
some. It is much easier to generate many rules describing experiences than to think 
out more general principles. 
During session #3 certainty factors were introduced (called also degrees of belief). 
The application is prepared to record every rule with additional information regarding 
the level of certainty. The experts have four levels at their disposal: low, moderate, 
high, absolute.  Each of these levels names an exact numeric value (e.g. absolute = 
100% certainty that a given statement is true). This session was started with an analy-
sis of knowledge acquired so far. Despite having new opportunities, the experts  
decided not to adjust the existing rules. They asked for the knowledge base to be 
cleaned and entered a set of rules again. For every rule or single variable, they took

Methods of Incomplete and Uncertain Knowledge Acquisition 349 
into consideration certainty factors. After adding the possibility of expressing the 
degree of certainty, the experts considered the tool more useful. They found it more 
flexible as well.  
Session #4 was planned as an attempt to archive a complete set of rules in the base. 
The higher the level of knowledge completeness (quantity of rules), the more precise 
are the answers generated by the system. Unlike sessions 1-3, when the experts had to 
fill an empty base with new rules, during session #4 a new approach was suggested. 
The specialists received an automatically generated complete knowledge base (all 
combinations of input variables). However, each rule had not been assigned a hy-
pothesis. The experts were expected to analyze such a knowledge base and add all the 
hypotheses for each case. Although from a knowledge engineering point of view, the 
objective seemed to be well founded, the ex perts rejected it. They considered such a 
method of knowledge acquisition as an impediment. This approach has proved to be 
too difficult to implement, especially if the complete database consists of too many 
(according to the subjective evaluation of each of the experts) rules to analyze. 
5   Summary 
In this paper, the authors described an experiment which adds new value to their  
research. It also gives experience within their work on knowledge acquisition and 
processing. 
The authors prepared special conditions for gathering knowledge with different 
types of imperfection. At the same time, they made many observations of experts’ 
behavior during key moments in the process (e.g. making final decisions when the 
opinions of different experts are contradictory to each other). All parties involved 
proved the usefulness of the meeting. 
The most interesting result of the experiment was completely unexpected. Knowl-
edge engineers together with experts came to  the conclusion that there is a significant 
difference between their particular goals. The primary scientific goal was set by the 
team from the Department of Information Technology Management. The authors 
(designers of the algorithm), being aware of the key aspects of processing incomplete 
and uncertain knowledge, decided to eliminate them. Introducing additional function-
alities during every new session was supposed to help the experts to express their 
knowledge in the most complete way. However, the experts defined their goals from a 
business perspective. They did not consider incomplete knowledge as an obstacle for 
using such a system in a live environment. According to their assumptions, there is no 
need to generate all case rules. There is no need to think of hypothetical situations that 
may never happen. Both sides agreed that only constant monitoring of the knowledge 
acquisition process can guarantee success in building a fully functional application 
and using it in an effective way. This can be archived by the great number of consul-
tations with experts.  
The presented project was the first such session with experts organized by the  
Department of Information Technology Management. It was agreed that it constitutes 
an important step in building an applicatio n to acquire and process knowledge for the 
evaluation of information technology.

350 C. Orłowski, T. Sitek, and R. Rybacki 
References 
1. Orłowski, C.: Wprowadzenie. In: Orłowski C. (ed.) Zarz ądzanie technologiami infor-
matycznymi. Stan i perspektywy rozwoju. Pomorskie Wydawnictwo Naukowo-Techniczne, 
Gdańsk, p. 5 (2006) 
2. Sitek, T., Orłowski, C.: Model zarz ądzania zasobami wiedzy w środowisku oceny  
technologii Informatycznych. In: Orłowski, C., Kowalczuk, Z., S zczerbicki E. (eds.)  
Zarządzanie Wiedz ą i Technologiami Informatycznymi. Pomorskie Wydawnictwo Nau-
kowo-Techniczne, Gdańsk, pp. 403–412 (2008) 
3. Orłowski, C.: Semantyczna specyfikacja procesów ADM dla potrzeb doboru metod  
zarządzania przedsięwzięciami (w opracowaniu) 
4. Orłowski, C., Sitek, T.: Ocena technologii informatycznych - koncepcja wykorzystania sys-
temów inteligentnych. In: Knosala R. (ed.): Komputerowo Zintegrowane Zarz ądzanie, vol. 
II. Oficyna Wydawnicza Polskiego Towarzystwa Zarz ądzania Produkcj ą, Opole, p. 153 
(2007) 
5. Bolc, L., Borodziewicz, W., Wójcik, M.: Podstawy przetwarzania informacji niepewnej i 
niepełnej, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warszawa (1991)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 351–359, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
An Approach to Agent-Based Supporting  
System for IT Projects 
Cezary Orłowski and Artur Ziółkowski 
Gdansk University of Technology, Department of IT Management,  
80-233 Gdańsk, Narutowicza 11/12 
{cor,aziolko}@zie.pg.gda.pl 
Abstract. The natural development of information technology area stimulates 
intense growth of various technologies which support basic organization proc-
esses. The range of technologies implies appropriate management thereof, as 
well as accurate correspondence with conducted activities. Abandonment of ac-
tivities within individual branches in fav our of project approach to performed 
assignments (especially those connected with software development) has re-
cently become a popular subject of management. This approach involves a vari-
ety of technologies which support project tasks. Yet the question arises, how to 
harmonize proper technologies with project management in an effective way. 
Agent system that is built by authors is a kind of solution to this problem. That 
system is a kind of tool which serves to help project managers with the choice 
of a proper method and technology of project management. One of most impor-
tant decision taken before project start is method and tools selection. When 
method is not fitted to project team it can provide to project’s failure. Also 
many times client’s knowledge about IT project area can be important for  
getting success. 
Keywords: IT project, agent system, decision supporting. 
1   Introduction (Context of Research) 
The natural development of information technology fields stimulates intense growth 
in various technologies which support basic organization processes. The range of 
technologies implies appropriate management thereof, as well as accurate correspon-
dence with conducted activities. The abandonment of activities within individual 
branches in favour of a project approach to performed assignments (especially those 
connected with software development) has recently become a popular subject of man-
agement. This approach involves a variety of technologies which support project 
tasks. Yet the question arises of how to harmonize proper technologies with project 
management in an effective way. Agent system designed by authors is a tool for  
support some managers work, especially tied with choosing method and tools for their 
projects.  
The following agent system [2], supported by ontologies and an expert system, is a 
tool which serves to help project managers with the choice of a proper method and 
technology of project management. The above-mentioned system for information

352 C. Orłowski and A. Ziółkowski 
technology assessment is based on intelligent units designed for acquiring and proc-
essing knowledge [4]. The role of these units is performed by agents which are the 
basic components of multi-agent systems and at the same time are identified as inde-
pendent beings able to take action and perform tasks for the user. The idea of using 
agents for information technology assessment results directly from their immanent 
features, in addition to the broad spectrum of possibilities (particularly considering a 
Semantic Web, where the function of intelligent agents seems to be essential) [1]. 
The function of agents is to acquire and process information. Therefore, their sig-
nificance for the assessment system might be seen in two ways. The first task is to 
acquire information from the environment (supplying the system at the same time); 
the second task is to generate an assessment and upload it to the user (or customer). In 
order to avoid subjective assessment, the assessment should be generated by inde-
pendent agents. The assessment is based on the attached fact database, free from any 
preconceptions held by user, expert or any other individual. 
2   Stages of Model Evolution 
The following model of an agent system for IT project management support is the 
effect of a few iterations. The model has been developed and tailored during research 
at Gdansk University of Technology. Succes sive iterations have been applied to the 
final version of the model of the agent system that is presented in this article.  
In the first stage, the main elements have been defined. The authors decided that 
the main components of the system should be (in addition to the agent system): 
 
• An expert system (based on facts and rules that are necessary for inference of 
fuzzy rules) 
• Ontologies (that are responsible for the formal correctness of information) 
• Other intelligent objects (like neural networks, genetic algorithms), which can 
support the main process in the system  
 
This pointed to research which needed a definition of cooperation for all system com-
ponents. At the same time, independent research was undertaken for all elements such 
as agents, ontologies and the expert system. This was needed to ensure the correct 
model evolution. 
The next step of the research was focused on the definition of the main functional-
ity of the system. The authors had to check how the system can be useful from  
the point of view of information technology evaluation. This stage was finished by 
working out the functional prototype of the system for IT evaluation. The functional 
prototype included the definition of all agents and tasks for them. This enabled the 
definition of information flow inside the system. The main conclusion of this stage 
was the definition of the main functionality of the system. This was as follows: 
 
• Information acquisition from the system’s client (user) 
• Resources searching 
• Inference founded on resources 
• Management of agents in the system

An Approach to Agent-Based Supporting System for IT Projects 353 
3   Identification of the Main Variables 
3.1   Problems with Matching Management Methods to IT Projects 
The problem of selection methods for the management of IT projects is the increas-
ingly frequent managers’ "dilemma". It turns out that the wrong choice of method 
often contributes to the failure of the project (in the form of non-compliance with its 
limitations - the budget or schedule). It thus follows that support for decision-making 
methods and tools used for project planning is an essential task of the project man-
ager. Support should therefore focus on the function of planning in particular, because 
it was within this function that a decision is taken on how to continue the project. In 
other words, it appears that this function of management is crucial for the further 
course of the project. Mistakes in planning (both the team and work schedule) may 
have far-reaching consequences for the conduct of the project. It follows, therefore, 
that the most important decisions regarding the method of project management must 
be planned carefully. The planning project manager should identify the method in-
tended to carry out the project and select a tool that will assist its implementation. 
The issue of the choice of the correct way to implement the project may thus  
determine its success. If a manager chooses a little-known method or one poorly rec-
ognized by the team, it can result in stopping work in the course of the project. 
It appears that the question of the proper method of selection is very important 
from the perspective of the whole project. The appropriate selection method therefore 
seems crucial for the entire project. It seems more reasonable to support managers just 
at the stage of decision-making in planning a project with an independent IT system 
indicating which method will be optimal for the specific project. 
The issue of the selection method of project management is therefore an integral 
part of the basic functions of management-planning. It therefore seems reasonable to 
support project managers in the choice of implementing IT projects as well as the 
selection of appropriate tools to manage such projects. 
This also means that the hypothesis that managers should be systematically  
supported in terms of their choice of the implementation of projects appears to be 
confirmed by the above considerations. It is worth noting also that there is now a very 
large number of formal methods for project management (approximately 10 major 
methods, such as RUP, PRINCE, SCRUM, XP). In addition, managers can find many 
methods individually-created by software  manufacturers for their own needs (as in 
SAP). By contrast, there are even more information tools in support of these methods 
(the portal 4pm.pl reported that there were more than 100 free applications supporting 
the management of projects in 2008). A system solution allowing for the input 
method to specify the conditions for the implementation of projects as well as identify 
the appropriate IT tool to the project s eems to be very much needed, and connects 
with the main objective, that is, optimizing management processes performed by 
project managers. 
But to define these input variables, which may be relevant to the selection method 
of project management, it is necessary to analyze the key components occurring at the 
very beginning when planning IT projects. These components and their description 
will allow for the extraction of the basic parameters influencing managerial decisions 
regarding the selection of methods and tools.

354 C. Orłowski and A. Ziółkowski 
4   Identification of Key Variables Affecting the Choice of Method 
One of the main characteristics of project specific information is that it is unique, or that 
it is difficult to identify two identical or nearly identical implemented projects. It ap-
pears, however, that despite this uniqueness, a set of factors can be distinguished that 
will occur in every project and that the specificity of these factors depends on the subse-
quent decisions by managers which translate into success (or failure) of the project. 
These factors also appear to be relevant to the methods of selecting the project. These 
features certainly should include the maturity of the client and the maturity of the team 
implementing the project. A typical factor seems to be the complexity of work in the 
project, which can be called the entropy of the project (the degree of disorder). 
 
Client 
The customer is the primary subject of any ongoing project. It can be concluded that 
the presence of the client (usually present at the beginning of negotiations and discus-
sions on the scope of the project) provides a starting point because it is the client’s 
order which usually begins the planning of projects. This allows you to recognize that 
the implementation of computerized processe s are a kind of draw (pull), where the 
whole process starts with customer orders, followed by a "pull value", which is col-
lecting information about what is to be the subject of the execution of the project. The 
presence of a client in the process of impl ementing IT projects confirms the validity 
of the project. The presence of the customer can therefore be considered as a constant 
feature of all projects. 
However, the question remains of the customer’s impact on the course of the pro-
ject itself. A typical phenomenon is the changing of customer requirements during the 
implementation of projects. Something that seemed important to the customer at the 
beginning shall be replaced by other requirements in the course of the project. A typi-
cal phenomenon is also the client increasing the scope of the project, which often 
translates into changes in cost or schedule. The role of the manager in this case is to 
steer the work to meet those expectations or  adapt them to the constraints of the pro-
ject. It is said that customer satisfaction is a guarantee of future cooperation as well as 
building a strong market position for the company pursuing the project. American 
studies show that one unhappy customer contributes to a loss of from 7 to 12 potential 
customers, and therefore meeting the expectat ions of the customer seems to be a pri-
ority (indeed some formal project management methods such as RUP say this explic-
itly). This does not mean that the role of the customer is unlimited. There may in fact 
be situations in which certain customer ex pectations cannot be achieved, or are not 
relevant to the ongoing project and, according to manager, might be ignored. In this 
situation, the most recommended way for the negotiations is to lead to a common 
direction for both parties - the contractor and the client. 
A very common phenomenon is the lack of concrete expectations for the project by 
the client’s computer. This means a situation in which the customer does not fully 
know what is expected, needs "some" IT so lution, but is not able to determine the 
parameters of this solution. The client is not able to precisely define his needs, which 
makes it more difficult to translate the expectations of the system design. This situa-
tion is quite difficult especially for the project manager. Firstly, it is very difficult to 
determine the scope of the project (how much time it will take, what should be done). 
Secondly, during the implementation of the project, it may be that the client begins to

An Approach to Agent-Based Supporting System for IT Projects 355 
identify what is expected and these expectations are quite different from the goals at 
the beginning. This obviously results in the need to make changes in the project, in 
the worst case meaning that some work has been done in vain. 
The opposite situation may happen, however, when the client knows what he needs 
and he is able to further specify precision at every stage of the project. This may be 
due to his knowledge of the IT industry, or his awareness that his precise expectations 
are essential - to himself and the contractor of the project. 
So how can one understand the role of the customer IT enterprise? Certainly, the key 
to all of the work. Customer requirements may change; the customer may modify a set 
of desired functionality. They may also require changes to the project and conclude that 
the work carried out does not coincide with their own vision of the IT solution. 
In addition, it should be noted that the team becomes a necessity and yet the project 
cannot predict customer behavior. Unfortunately, any unpredicted customer behavior 
can affect the course of work, causing changes in the schedule or scope. This means, 
therefore, that the project manager should co nsider binding a client to plan. This also 
means that the client behavior must be taken into account when matching the imple-
mentation method of the project. It may be that for certain types of customer behav-
iors, it is better to use an agile method; for others a classical one. 
The presented characterization of the client should be called maturity. Maturity 
means how the client is able to imply changes in the realized project. In other words, 
the maturity of the client is this combination of traits and behaviors that affect the 
course of the project and the chosen method for this project. 
Customer maturity may be presented as a model matrix, which serves to precisely 
define the customer profile, where the maturity of the client is represented by two 
features: matching (fitting) and suitability. The combination of these features there-
fore allows us to build the following matrix: 
 
CLIENT SUITABILITY NON-SUITABILITY 
MATCHING 
Matched and Suitable  
 
Means a situation in which the 
client knows the field of project 
management and understands the 
process is open to cooperation. 
This includes customer 
representatives seeking Project 
Managers 
Matched and Non-suitable 
 
Means a situation in which the  
client is open to cooperation but does 
not know the project area. A frequent 
case is a customer maturing during 
the project. 
MISMATCHING 
Mismatched and Suitable 
 
Means a situation in which the 
client knows the project area but 
it is difficult to cooperate. Such a 
case often leads to a situation in 
which the project is threatened. 
 
Mismatched and Non-suitable 
 
Means a situation in which the  
customer does not know the area of 
project management, does not  
understand the circumstances of the 
project and their level of involvement 
in the project is negligible. This is the 
most difficult option for the manager. 
Fig. 1. Matrix of client’s suitability and matching

356 C. Orłowski and A. Ziółkowski 
Thus shown, a combination of key parameters are a starting point for the client to 
determine their measurability, so that they can provide input data for agents. 
4.1   Team and Organization 
Prior to the implementation of IT projects, the role of the manager is to plan properly 
and obtain resources (including human), which should be used during the project’s 
lifetime. The primary resource is undoubtedly the team and the people creating it. 
Over roughly a decade, the role of the human factor in business activity has in-
creased substantially. Knowledge management in a highly dynamic market has led to 
a growing interest in intellectual capital, which largely consists of what people do. 
The definition of human capital is that it is understood as " inseparably integrated 
with the man (employee), his knowledge, experience, presence and capabilities of the 
enterprise." [7] This means, therefore, that the quality of that capital can have a large 
impact on the success of any conducted activities. 
There is therefore no doubt that in the case of the implementation of IT projects the 
team's role is particularly important. How effective and efficient the team will be, will 
determine the success of IT projects. The role of the manager is to steer the work in 
such a way that all members work in an optimal manner. 
The maturity of the project team should therefore be analyzed by the project man-
ager, so that the right team is selected for the method of the project. It very often turns 
out that less mature teams do not do well in projects with a high degree of variability 
(which is carried out using agile methods). Analogously, for such projects it is easier 
to organize the work of a very experienced team (which is consistent with agile meth-
ods) than to fit into a fairly rigid framework of classical methods. The validity of the 
level of maturity of the team to the selection method convinced the authors of this 
article in one of our projects. At the beginning of the proposed project, a small experi-
enced team composed of 18 members divided into smaller groups, which organized 
their work. Unfortunately, such a decision was not matched by significant progress. 
When a lack of top-down task clarifica tion was observed, it was decided to create a 
plan of action (i.e. reference is made to the assumptions of classical methods of pro-
ject management). Then this was presented to participants in areas of task forces (in 
accordance with RUP, where the tasks are defi ned in disciplines, reflecting the nature 
of tasks, such as testing, manufacture, management, etc.). This approach was met with 
great enthusiasm by the participants and constituted a breakthrough in the project, 
giving the chance to continue to work more effectively in the separate groups of tasks 
from the top down. It thus follows that the selection method is important from the 
standpoint of the implementation of a group of tasks. 
4.2   Project Entropy 
Entropy (dispersion) of the project is a new concept for the project and is a measure 
of the degree of disorder. It is assumed that the entropy is a measure of the uncertainty 
of project implementation and management of manufacturing processes.

An Approach to Agent-Based Supporting System for IT Projects 357 
4.3   Agent System Architecture 
In the course of the work on the model, the following components of the model have 
been accepted (Figure 1): 
 
 
Fig. 2. Architecture of an IT assessment agent system 
The User reports that he or she wants to ask a question on a specific domain (1). 
The request is handled by the Intermediary Agent 1 (with a GUI role). The Ontology 
Agent 1 is then used to provide the proper domain ontology (2, 3). The questionnaire 
form is presented to a User by an Intermediary Agent 1 (4). The User inputs a ques-
tion (5), which is further transferred to the Managing Agent (6). This Agent sends the 
User’s question to the Searching Agent (7). Depending on the question provided, 
different parts of the knowledge base may need to be utilized in this process. That is 
why dedicated searching agents can be run—for rule bases (8a) or fact bases (8bc). 
The searching process is in progress (9) an d the results are collected (10) and passed 
to the Searching Agent (11). The answer is transferred to the Managing Agent which 
sends it to the Intermediary Agent 2 (12). The answer must be provided to the User in 
a human-readable form. That is why the ontology is used to serve the appropriate 
notions and semantics (14, 15). After these post-processing activities, the answer is 
displayed to the User (16).[9]. 
Thus the task of agents and the issue of input into the system is set, allowing for 
the appointment of the next step, the presented concepts. Indeed, it seems reasonable 
to continue to carry out a detailed stage parameterization of input variables (customer 
maturity, maturity group, and the entropy of the project) by defining measurable val-
ues, so that it will be possible to complete their processing by the system agents. It is 
also reasonable to have a proxy agent equipped with such knowledge resources,

358 C. Orłowski and A. Ziółkowski 
which enables the agent to accurately determine the input parameters of the system. 
Getting Started quantification of input factors have been made. An example of such 
parameterization can be the vector-matrix approach. 
The vector of initial level maturity ∆kt can be described by two variables represent-
ing increases in levels of matching and suitability 
         
                    
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
Δ
Δ=
t
t
po
pp
tΔk
 
(1) 
 
where: 
∆ppt – means an increase in the level of customer matching  ∆ppt ∈ J[5,100] 
∆pot – means an increase in the level of customer suitability ∆pot ∈ J[5,100] 
Increases in the levels of team/organization maturity ∆ot, the customer ∆kt and 
reduction in the entropy of the project ∆pt may also be included in the vector- 
matrix description. Their statement allows us to build the vector level of project 
management ∆zt  
 
                    ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
Δ
Δ
Δ
=
t
t
t
p
o
k
tΔz  (2) 
 
The adoption of formal writing can draw a final conclusion that there is the possi-
bility of the full parameterization of factors affecting the choice of methods for the 
project. In subsequent work on the agent system, it therefore seems reasonable to 
implement a model created based on Java and then verify the results obtained by the 
agents working on the basis of a formal description of input parameters. 
 
 
Fig. 3. Key areas of the system 
In accordance with the values taken by the input parameters (concerning project 
complexity, organization maturity and customer maturity), a process of assessment 
generation by the agent system is activated. As a result of the generated assessment,

An Approach to Agent-Based Supporting System for IT Projects 359 
the user is suggested which method of IT project completion should be used for the 
purpose of enterprise architecture development. At the first stage of the system opera-
tion, the agent downloads information entered by the user in the query field. The 
information is uploaded to the management agent. Based on the information, the 
management agent makes a decision about using the system resources. Such task flow 
results from the established organization of the system, where agents are classified 
according to functions and hierarchy. With the help of the knowledge base, the man-
agement agent analyses the uploaded query. If a search is needed, the management 
agent activates the search agent and sends the message concerning a search of the 
knowledge base (fact base). When a calculation is needed, the management agent 
activates the calculation module (expert system, neuron network) and then orders the 
search agent to collect the results. Next, the results are sent to the management agent. 
The results collected from the calculation are uploaded to the customer through the 
mediator agent. 
At the same time, this structure indicates the need for the optimal choice of as-
sessment model. Currently, a system which could use fuzzy modeling appears to be 
the most efficient one. It has also been planned to extend the module responsible for 
statistical analysis as well as modeling using data correctness verification. The thus 
constructed whole is aimed at achieving high-quality results. 
5   Summary 
The dynamic development of the IT branch causes a great need for specialists in in-
formation project management. The development of computerization in Poland in-
volves the increased demand for employees to know not only information problems 
but management problems too. Information project management is a kind of sphere 
that joins both these aspects. To lead a project well, a manager should be knowledge-
able in information science topics, but should also be someone that can build a good 
team, define tasks for all project participants and can guarantee full-effective realiza-
tion of the project. Thus, when someone wishes to make their project successful, he 
should support all the processes during the realization of the project using information 
tools. It is very important to match these tools well. The agent system presented in 
this article should help project managers to match the right methods to the projects 
they are leading.  
References 
1. Altmann, J., Gruber, F., Klug, L., Stockner, W., Weippl, E.: Using Mobile Agents in the real 
World: A Survey and Evaluation of Agent Platforms. In: Proceedings of the Sec ond Interna-
tional Workshop on Infrastructure for MAS and Scalable MAS, Montreal, Canada (2001) 
2. Angryk, R., Galant, V., Paprzycki, M.: Travel Support System – an Agent-Based Framewor. 
In: Proceeding of the International Conference on Internet Computing. CSREA Press,  
Las Vegas (2002) 
3. Galant I, V., Tubyrcy, J.: Inteligentny Agent Programowy. Prace Naukowe AE Wrocław 
(2001) 
4. Jennings, N.R.: An agent-based approach for building complex software systems. Commu-
nications of the ACM (2001)

ACO-GA Approach to Paper-Reviewer
Assignment Problem in CMS
Tomasz Kolasa1 and Dariusz Kr´ol2
1 Faculty of Computer Science and Management,
Wroc/suppresslaw University of Technology, Poland
Tomasz.Kolasa@student.pwr.wroc.pl
2 Institute of Informatics,
Wroc/suppresslaw University of Technology, Poland
Dariusz.Krol@pwr.wroc.pl
Abstract. Conference management that requires proper coordination
and international communication, is a complex task. There are many
Conference Management Systems (CMS), which can be used to carry
out the conference. A convenient to use, free and eﬀective module for au-
tomatic paper-reviewer assignment is still not available. Searching for the
best assignments relying only on common paper-reviewer topics not al-
ways will give good solutions. This paper proposes an approach, that uses
the reviewers responses information, to tune the solution up. Proposed
algorithm combines genetic algorithm (GA) and ant colony optimization
(ACO), to quickly ﬁnd good solutions. The experiment results conﬁrm
the superiority of proposed algorithm.
1 Introduction and Motivation
An intelligents ystem is needed to carryo ut ani nternational conference,w hich
requires the cooperation ofs everal diﬀerentp eople [1] [3]. Ensuringp roper co-
ordination andc ommunication requires the system to support several distinct
paper revision phases: submission, evaluation, decision, andﬁ nal paper collec-
tion. After all authors submitt h eirp a p e r s, the evaluation phase beg insa nd
reviewers are asked by the PCc h airs to review a number ofp a p e r s.W hen all
reviews are ready, ad e cision to accept orr eject each paperism a d eand accepted
authors are asked to sendaﬁ nalv ersion oft h eirp a p e r.A fter the ﬁnalv ersions
of accepted papers are subm itted, the papers are c ollected andp rinted in the
conference proceedings.T he qualityo f the published papers strongly depends on
the evaluation phase.S electingap r oper reviewer to review ap a r ticular paper is
notas implet a s k.T hisa s signmentp rocess, donem anually, can be a tedious and
vulnerable job.T here are many aspects that must be takeni nto account when
proposinga n automated solution forp a p e r-reviewer assignmentt a s k, such as:
reviewers qualiﬁcations, their capacity constraints, adequate numbers ofr eviews
for each paper, conﬂicts of interest [2].
There are several conference managements ystems that propose an automated
solution forp a p e r-reviewer assignment.M any oft h e m,l ike EasyChair, present
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 360–369, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

ACO-GA Approach to Paper-Reviewer Assignment Problem in CMS 361
an explicit “bidding” phase andu tilize the collected data fort h eoptimization of
paper-reviewer assignment.I n this phase the reviewers are asked to declare their
interests in reviewingp a r ticular papers (rank the papers fr om low to high in-
terest). However,i t is importantt o remember that the system ought to support
the PCc h air in theirt a s kand nott o hand over a great part oft h eir work to the
reviewers.M any oft h e mdon ott endt o haveag ood opinion on the “bidding”
phase.N evertheless, they shouldh aveap ossibility to express their preferences
over particular papers.T he motivation ist o design andp r e s entt h erobust al-
gorithm that will produce goods olutions over topics information distribution,
without much exploitation oft h er eviewer’st ime.T he topics ork eywords data
are considered more accurate to predict well-matched paper-reviewer pairs [2].
The GRAPEs ystem [4] uses topics information predominantly, but also sup-
ports the “bidding” phase.T he distribution ofr eviewers andp a p e r sover topics
is nota lwaysp r e dictable.S o the preferences supplied by reviewers are used for
gettingt h ewrinkles out oft opics assignments.H o wever, this inconvenienta nd
time consuming “bidding” phase often gives inaccurate feedback.
The algorithm proposed in thisp a p e rt ries to ﬁt a conference management
business processes in am ore naturalw ay. Paper-reviewer assignments are done
based only on topics information (paper keywords andr eviewer topics of in-
terests are matched). The results are presented to the PCc h air.A fter the PC
chaird e cides the assignments are ready, the reviewers are informed about the
proposed reviews. Each reviewer has the possibility to accept ord e cline the pro-
posed review. There isa d ditionali nformation about the decliner e s ponse that
is supplied by reviewer (conﬂict of interests,i nadequate domain ofp a p e r, and
note nough time). That kind of feedback fromr eviewers ism inimal but signif-
icant.T he response information ist h en utilized to reevaluate the ﬁrst solution
andp ropose a better one.T he generali dea of the proposed solution ist o com-
binet h ea dvantages ofG A and ACO, the ability to cooperatively explore the
search space andt o avoid premature convergence, to quickly ﬁndg oods olutions
within as m all region of the search space.B oth GA and ACO perform veryw ell
in assignmentp roblems [8][ 1 1 ] .The ACO-GA hybrida lgorithms haves hown
better eﬃciency thano rdinaryA CO-based algorithm andac lassical genetica l-
gorithm [7][ 1 0 ] .S o lution representation in ACO andG A algorithms was based
on binary matrix [12].
2 The Paper-Reviewer Assignment Problem
Properly assigningr eviewers to corresponding paper can be considered as Maxi-
mum Generalized Assignment Problem (GAP1). In the conference management
domain there isas e t R ofr eviewers (ofs ize m) andas e t A ofp a p e r s(ofs ize
n). Any reviewer can be assigned to review any paper,w ith the pr oﬁt based
1 GAP is deﬁned as follows: given a set of box, with capacity constraint and a set of
items with diﬀerent size and value for each box; pack a maximum-valued subset of
items into the boxes [6].

362 T. Kolasa and D. Kr´ ol
on assignment.T here must be a deﬁ ned number ofr eviewers assigned to re-
view ap a p e r.F urthermore, the capacity constraint isg iven fore a c hr eviewer.
It isd e sired to ﬁnda n assignment in which all reviewers don ote xceed their
capacity, all papers haver e q uisite number ofr eviewers andt otal proﬁt oft h e
assignment ism aximized.M oreover, conﬂicts of interest andr eviewer response
are alsoi mportantc onstraints.
After the paper-reviewer assignmentp rocess isc ompleted, all reviewers regis-
tered in CMS are notiﬁed about reviewsa s signed to them.T he reviewer response
φ isar e a son ofr eviewer decision to refuse the request forar e view. To ensure a
necessary feedback, the φ response describes two kinds ofa nswers:
φ1 —T he assigned paper does notﬁ tt o reviewer’sa r e aof interests.
φ2 —T he reviewer does noth aveat ime to review assigned paper.
The problem ist o ﬁndp a p e r-reviewer assignments set, that satisﬁes a set of
constraints Θ:
θ1 —T he number k> 0o fd iﬀerentr eviewers assigned to review ap a p e ris
constantf ora ll papers andd e ﬁned by the user (common values are k = 2
and k =3 ) .
θ2 —T he reviewer r capacity lr /greaterorequalslant0i sam a ximum number ofp a p e r st h a tc an
be assigned to reviewer r.I tc an be deﬁned fora ll reviewers separately, the
reasonable initialv alue can be deﬁned as f ollows:∀r∈R• lr =⌈k·n
m ⌉.T he
capacity lr1 ofar e viewer r1,w ho gavear e s ponse φ2 is decreased b y1 .
To preservea no verall capacityo fr eviewers, the capacity lr2 ofar a ndom
reviewer r2,w ho did notg ivear e s ponse φ2 is increased by1 .
θ3 —T he value bar = true (bar ∈{ true, false})i ndic a t e st h a ta sa s signment
ofr eviewer r to paper a isp ossible, due tol ack ofc onﬂicts of interest and
φ1 response ofr eviewer r to paper a.
To haveac learer viewo n the paper-reviewer assignmentp roblem in multi-agent
conference managements ystem, the conference itselfc an be described in terms
of organization. Which consist ofs e tof agents who play roles within a structure
that deﬁnes the relationships between the various roles.T he goalo f organization
isa c hieved by cooperating agents tryingt o achievet h eir own subgoals.T he
work [3] deﬁnes a metamodelo f organization by goals, roles, agents, capabilities,
potential, assignments, policies, andad omain model. Capabilities are central to
the process of determining which agents can playw hich roles andh ow well they
can play them,w hilep olicies constrain the assignment of agents to roles and
goalst h u scontrollingt h eallowable states oft h eorganization. The conference
organization model can be deﬁned by:
Goals —T he organization tries to achieveas e t ofg oals,w hich can be assigned
toi ndividual agents.F or instance, the goalo fe valuatingas p e ciﬁc paper can
be achieved by agents playingt h er eviewer role.
Roles — Conference managements ystem speciﬁc roles like: author, reviewer,
PCm e m b e r,P Cc h air.
Capabilities — Capabilities of agent ofp layingas p e ciﬁc role.

ACO-GA Approach to Paper-Reviewer Assignment Problem in CMS 363
Potential —P otentialo f agent (in speciﬁc role)o fb einga s signed to speciﬁc
goal.
Policies — Constrains on assignments of agents to roles andg oals, the repre-
sentation bases on previously presented Θ set.
3 Proposed ACO-GA Algorithm
The proposed solution forp a p e r-reviewer assignmentp roblem combines the ad-
vantages ofG A and ACO.T hese two algorithms complemente a c hother in order
to ﬁndg ooda s signments anda void premature convergence.I n each iteration of
ACO-GA algorithm, the best s olution oft h etwo algorithms iss elected.B oth
algorithms continue the search based on that collaboratively chosen solution.
The ﬁtness function represents the overall qualityo fas olution as meano fa s-
signments qualities.T he assignmentq u ality degree bases on ac oncept ofs e a r c h-
ingf orr eviewer-paper pairs that are the most coincide in theirk eywords based
characteristics andm aximizingt h ec overage degree, that isa number ofp a-
per keywords that are covered by assigned reviewers’ keywords.T he adjustment
function U andt h ecoverage function V isp r e s ented.B oth functionsd e ﬁnea
qualityo fa s signment{a, r}2.T he adjustmentf unction U implies a degree of
common reviewer r andp a p e ra keywords:
U(a, r)= |K(r)∩ K(a)|
|K(a)| (1)
where
K(a)— returnsak e ywords set ofp a p e ra (K(a)⊂ KC),
K(r)— returnsak e ywords set ofr eviewer r (K(r)⊂ KC),
KC — ak eywords set deﬁned in the conference system.
The coverage function V deﬁnes a papera coverage intensity, which isp ropor-
tional to a number ofp a p e ra keywords that are covered by at least onek eyword
ofa s signed reviewers:
V (a)= |K(a)∩⋃
r∈Ra •K(r)|
|K(a)| (2)
where
Ra — as e tofr eviewers assigned to review ap a p e ra.
Then the assignment{i, j} quality degree can be deﬁned as suitability function
f:
f(i, j)= γ· U(i, j)+( 1− γ)· V (i)( 3 )
where
γ — an algorithm parameter that determinet h er elative importance
ofa djustmentf unction information andt h ec overage function
value.
Respectively the ﬁtness function F fors olution S isd e ﬁned as follows:
2 The {a, r} means that reviewer r is assigned to review a paper a.

364 T. Kolasa and D. Kr´ ol
F(S)=
∑
{i,j}∈S f(i, j)
|S| (4)
4 Ant Colony Optimization Algorithm
The AntC olony Optimization can be applied too ptimization problems that can
be described by graphs [5]. The idea ist o use nature inspired artiﬁcial ants to
search foram inimum cost path in a weighted graph.
Here,i n the paper-reviewer assignmentp roblem graph, the nodes represent
papers andr eviewers,w ith the edges between them indicatingt h ea s signment.
In contradiction to travelings alesman problem (TSP) there are t wo kinds of
nodes: the reviewers and the papers,w ith edges constrained to paper-reviewer
connections.T he paper-reviewer assignmentp roblem graph ca n be deﬁned as
G := (V,E )w ith nodes V = A∪R ande d g e sE⊆{{ u, v} : u∈ A∧v∈ R}.I nthis
paper anA CO algorithm that goes through a notf ully connected construction
graph isp roposed.
The search for the best paper-reviewer assignments isd oneb y an antt r aver-
sal through the graph,w here all Θ constraints must be met a ndt h et r aversal
stoppingc riterion satisﬁed (e.g. all papers A havee xactly k reviewers assigned).
Each ant h has a memoryo ft r aversed edges implemented as tabu list.T he tabu
list contains edges that the a nt h cann ott r averse.T he knowledge about tra-
versed edges is essential to get awayw ith repeated assignments.T he fact that an
ant will nott r averse the edges speciﬁed in the tabu list can be utilized to ensure
θ3 constraint.T o do so, the tabu list is initialized with all assignments{a, r}
that fulﬁll bar = false.T he antp opulation ofs ize g traverses the paper nodes
andr eviewer nodes interchangeably. The probability that the hth anta s signs
reviewer node to paper node isg iven by:
ph
ij(t)=
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
τα
ij(t)·ηβ
ij(t)
∑
a∈allowedh
j (t) τα
aj(t)·ηβ
aj(t) if i∈ allowedh
j (t)∧ j∈ R
τα
ij(t)·ηβ
ij(t)
∑
r∈allowedh
i (t) τα
ir(t)·ηβ
ir(t) if i∈ A∧ j∈ allowedh
i (t)
0o therwise
(5)
where
τij — the pheromone value associated with assignment (org r a p he d g e)
{i, j},
ηij — the heuristic value associated with assignment{i, j},i n principle
ηij = f(i, j)w here f iss uitability function deﬁned in Eq.3 ,
allowedi — as e toff e a sible nodes currently nota s signed to i node, deﬁned
in Eq.6 ,
α,β — positiver e al parameters whose values determinet h er elative im-
portance of pheromone versus heuristic information.

ACO-GA Approach to Paper-Reviewer Assignment Problem in CMS 365
allowedh
i (t)=
⎧
⎨
⎩
{a∈ A :{a, i} /∈ tabuh∧| Rh
a| <k} if i∈ R
{r∈ R :{i, r} /∈ tabuh∧| Ah
r| <l r} if i∈ A
(6)
where
Ra — as e tofr eviewers assigned to review ap a p e ra,
Ar — as e tofp a p e r sa s signed to reviewer r.
The ant in search for optimal assignments traverses only feasible nodes to ﬁnd
ag oods olution that satisﬁes the Θ constraints.I no ther words, the ant h placed
in node i can traverse to some node j when j∈ allowedh
i .I n cases when the are
no such nodes available (allowedh
i ⊆ ∅) the antg e t ss t u c k.I t isﬁ ne when the
stopc riterion ism e t(∑
a∈A|Rh
a| = k), but otherwise the reviewers forr e m aining
papers must be found.I fa n antg ots t u c kin some node ith a sto be moved to a
diﬀerent node,w ithout doinga n assignment.T he action ofm ovingt h eantf rom
one node v1∈ V1 too ther node v2∈ V2 when V1 = V2, has been called the jump.
There are possiblet wo kind of jumps:
ω1 —w hen the ant h is in node i∈ A and|Rh
i| = k, the jump ton ode u∈
argmina∈A|Rh
a| occurs,
ω2 —w hen the ant h is in no de j ∈ R and|Ah
j| = lj, the jump ton o de
v∈ argminr∈R|Ah
r| occurs.
The pheromonee vaporation is essential fore xploration ofa nts aroundt h eopti-
mal solution in the following iterations.T he quantityo f pheromone, deposited
by ants,i sb ig ift h eg enerated solution isf e a sible. On the other hand, this value
iss e ttol o wifs olution is infeasible.T herefore, the quantityo f pheromone Δτh
ij
deposited by ant h depends on the solution quality:
Δτh
ij(t)=
⎧
⎨
⎩
F(Sh(t)) if{i, j}∈ Sh(t)
0o therwise
(7)
where
Sh(t)— as e tofa s signments foundb y ant h in time t,
F(S)— the ﬁtness function value fors olution S, Eq. 4.
After all ants havec ompleted theira s signments the global rule of pheromone
update fromE q. 8 isa p plied to all the edges.T he ants updates the pheromone
based on theirs olution quality, but the best antd e posits additional pheromone
on edges oft h eb e s tsolution.
τij(t +1 )=( 1− ρ)· τij(t)+
g∑
h=1
Δτh
ij(t)+ Δτb
ij(t)( 8)
where
ρ — ρ∈ (0, 1] is parameter called evaporation rate,
b —i ndicates the ant with best solution at each iteration.

366 T. Kolasa and D. Kr´ ol
5 Genetic Algorithm
The GAi mplementation isu singt wo-dimensional binary chromosome represent-
ing the paper-reviewer assignments.T he initial population isr andomly generated
and keeps the Θ constraints.T he selection oft h eindividuals isd onea c cording
to the roulette wheel method [9]. The oﬀsprings that keeps theΘ constraints are
generated usings p e cial two-argumentc rossing operator.T he parental population
isr e placed by the newo ﬀsprings.A fterwards, the one-argumentm u t a tion oper-
ator isa p plied to some randomly picked oﬀsprings.T he best individualw ithin
the population ism aintained over populations.
Each chromosome ise ncoded as a binary two-dimensional matrix C of n×m.
Each row oft hism a t rix corresponds too nep a p e r, ande a c hcolumn too ner e-
viewer. Cij =1 represents an assignment ofr eviewer j to ap a p e ri.A ccordingly,
Cij =0i n dicates that reviewer with columnn umber j is nota s signed to paper
with row number i.T he encodingm e t hod oft wo-dimensional binary chromosome
ﬁts well toA CO algorithm in implementation basis.S ousingt h etwo-dimensional
binary matrix also as ACO graph representation ﬁts well toA CO-GA combina-
tion, as there is no need fora ny solution re-representation. The initial population
isp a r tly randoma ndp a r tly generated to keep the constraints Θ.T he ﬁrst step
ist o randomly generate chromosomes that keep theθ1 and θ3 constraints.N ext,
some partoft hisg enerated population is improved to keep also the θ2 constraint.
The initial population that keep all the constraints helps to ﬁndag oods olution
quickly andt h er andomness enables to avoid premature convergence.
The procedure to generate randomc h romosome C that keeps the θ1 and θ3
constraints isd e ﬁned as follows:
forAll a ∈ A
forAll i ∈ [1..k]
get r ∈{ v : v ∈ R \ Ra ∧ bav = true}
assign: Car =1
The ﬁx procedure that improves a chr omosome to keep the θ2 constraint is
presented.I t isa lso ap a r toft wo-argumenta nd one-argument operators.T his
enforces the GA algorithm to seek the solution in area of search space that keeps
all the constraints.T he ﬁx procedure unassignsp a p e r sf romr eviewers who have
the greatest number ofa s signed papers a ndt h en assignsp a p e r sto reviewers
with the least number ofp a p e r s.T he procedure forc h romosome C isd e ﬁned as
follows:
while θ2 not met
get rmin ∈ arg min r ∈ R |Ar|
get rmax ∈ arg max r ∈ R |Ar|
get a ∈ Armax
get e ∈{ p : p ∈ A \ Armin ∧ bprmin = true}
unassign: Carmax =0
assign: Cermin =1

ACO-GA Approach to Paper-Reviewer Assignment Problem in CMS 367
The two-argument crossing operator invoked on parentali ndividuals P1
and P2 takes followings t e p sto produce the oﬀspring:
Step 1: based on P1 and P2 individuals, make a temporary chromosome
T = P1 ∨ P2
Step 2: initialize emptyo ﬀspring O1 and O2, andp roceed:
for i =1t o n
R1 = random_reviewers(k, T i)3
R2 = random_reviewers(k, T i)
O1i ← R14
O2i ← R2
Step 3: execute ﬁx procedure on oﬀspring
The one-argument mutation operatorinvoked on individual C takes fallow-
ings t e p sto produce the new, changed chromosome:
Step 1: get randomp a p e ra
Step 2: get randomr eviewer r assigned to paper a
Step 3: get randomr eviewer e nota s signed to paper a (and bae = true)
Step 4: switch reviewers: Car =0 , Cae =1
Step 5: execute ﬁx procedure on individual C
6 Evaluation and Conclusion
The system was evaluated on real-worldc onference data (KNS ) anda u tomat-
ically generated datasets (G1 and G2). T he real-worldd a t acomes fromt h e
academicc onference KNS held in 2009 at Wroc/suppresslawU n i versityo f Technology.
Characteristics of these datasets are presented in Tab.1 .
Table 1. Characteristics of evaluation data
|A|
 |R|
 |KC |
 min|K(a)|
 max|K(a)|
 min|K(r)|
 max|K(r)|
 FB
KNS
 179
 64
 80
 1
 7
 1
 15
 0.560
G1
 180
 40
 30
 2
 4
 2
 4
 0.901
G2
 200
 70
 35
 3
 11
 3
 11
 0.973
|A| -n u m b e ro fp a p e r s ;|R| -n u m b e ro fr e v i e w e r s ;|KC | -n u m b e ro fk e y w o r d s ;
min|K(a)| - minimal number of keywords per paper; max|K(a)| - maximal num-
ber of keywords per paper; min|K(r)| - minimal number of keywords per reviewer;
max|K(r)| - maximal number of keywords per reviewer; FB - best possible ﬁt-
ness (Eq. 9)
To evaluate the pr oposed algorithm capabilities, the computational experi-
ments were carried out.T he ACO-GA, ACO andG A algorithms were repeated
for 10 times each.T he real-worlda s signments doneb y the PCc h aira ndm e an
results ofa lgorithms processinga r ep r e s ented in Tab. 2.
3 Select k random reviewers assigned to paper i in chromosome T and memo-
rize as set R1.
4 Assign all reviewers from set R1 to paper i in oﬀspring chromosome O1.

368 T. Kolasa and D. Kr´ ol
Table 2. Results of ACO-GA, ACO and GA algorithms evaluation
Ω F U V time[s] iter
KNS
manual 0.548 0.307 0.251 0.254 - -
ACO 0.832 ± 0.001 0.466 ± 0.001 0.415 ± 0.001 0.517 ± 0.002 86.0 ± 0.4 500
GA 0.743 ± 0.003 0.416 ± 0.003 0.325 ± 0.004 0.507 ± 0.003 100.7 ± 0.6 500
0.828 ± 0.002 0.464 ± 0.002 0.382 ± 0.002 0.546 ± 0.003 189.0 ± 1.8 1000
ACO-GA 0.850 ± 0.001 0.476 ± 0.001 0.422 ± 0.001 0.531 ± 0.001 12.3 ± 0.1 50
0.893 ± 0.001 0.500 ± 0.001 0.440 ± 0.001 0.559 ± 0.002 176.8 ± 0.4 500
G1
ACO 0.905 ± 0.001 0.849 ± 0.001 0.757 ± 0.002 0.941 ± 0.001 76.2 ± 0.2 500
GA 0.748 ± 0.005 0.702 ± 0.005 0.518 ± 0.006 0.885 ± 0.004 65.7 ± 0.6 500
0.881 ± 0.003 0.798 ± 0.003 0.630 ± 0.004 0.965 ± 0.003 126.9 ± 0.3 1000
ACO-GA 0.926 ± 0.001 0.844 ± 0.001 0.746 ± 0.002 0.943 ± 0.002 9.2 ± 0.1 50
0.945 ± 0.001 0.886 ± 0.001 0.784 ± 0.002 0.988 ± 0.001 133.9 ± 0.5 500
G2
ACO 0.869 ± 0.001 0.858 ± 0.001 0.776 ± 0.002 0.940 ± 0.002 108.6 ± 0.1 500
GA 0.806 ± 0.002 0.796 ± 0.002 0.647 ± 0.003 0.945 ± 0.002 84.5 ± 0.8 500
0.874 ± 0.001 0.842 ± 0.001 0.716 ± 0.002 0.968 ± 0.001 162.5 ± 0.7 1000
ACO-GA 0.883 ± 0.001 0.860 ± 0.001 0.769 ± 0.002 0.951 ± 0.001 13.1 ± 0.1 50
0.909 ± 0.001 0.897 ± 0.001 0.814 ± 0.002 0.981 ± 0.001 197.6 ± 0.6 500
To ensure understandablee valuation, a best possible ﬁtness value FB and
measurement Ω of the accuracy rate of the proposed solution are given as follows:
Ω(S)= F(S)
FB
(9)
where
F(S)— ﬁtness ofs olution S (Eq. 4),
FB — aﬁ tness value of naives olution B, to construct such solution,
each paper has k best ﬁttingr eviewers (considering only the ad-
justment U deﬁned in Eq.1 )i teratively assigned.T he B solution
satisﬁes only θ1 and θ3 constraints.
ACO andG A parameter values used in experiments, are deﬁned as follows:
number ofr eviewers per paper k = 2; adjustmentr elative importance γ =0 .5;
GA population size: 200 crossingp robability: 0.8; mutation probability: 0.2;A CO
ants number: 100; pheromone importance α = 4; heuristic information impor-
tance β =1 ; pheromonee vaporation rate ρ =0 .1. All parameter values were
determined empirically. Parameter optimization can be considered as a topicf or
future research.
The experimentr e s ults presented in Tab. 2c onﬁrm the superiorityo fp roposed
ACO-GA algorithm.A l ltested algorithms have determined goods olutions.T he
combination oft wo population based algorithm ﬁnds better resu lts that ACO
andG A used separately.
The ACO-GA algorithm, searchingf or optimal paper-reviewer assignments
was pr oposed a nde valuated on real-worldc onference dataset .F o r future

ACO-GA Approach to Paper-Reviewer Assignment Problem in CMS 369
research, the proposed solution will be evaluated on diﬀerentc onference datasets
and embedded in Web conference managements ystem to check not only al-
gorithm robustness, but also end-user satisfaction. The embedded version of
algorithm will be reimplemented to perform better in multiprocessore nviron-
ment.Furthermore, proper algorithm reactionsf orr eviewers responses need to be
evaluated.
References
1. Benferhat, S., Lang, S.: Conference Paper Assignment. International Journal of
Intelligent Systems 16(10), 1183–1192 (2001)
2. Conry, D., Koren, Y., Ramakrishnan, N.: Recommender Systems for the Conference
Paper Assignment Problem. In: ACM Conference On Recommender Systems, pp.
357–360 (2009)
3. DeLoach, S.A., Oyenan, W.H., Matson, E.T.: A Capabilities-based Model for Adap-
tive Organizations. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 16(1), 13–56
(2008)
4. Di Mauro, N., Basile, T.M.A., Ferilli, S.: GRAPE: An Expert Review Assignment
Component for Scientiﬁc Conference Management Systems. Innovations in Applied
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 789–798 (2005)
5. Dorigo, M., St ¨utzle, T.: Ant Colony Optimization. MIT Press, Cambridge (2004)
6. Fleischer, L., Goemansy, M.X., Mirrokniy, V.S., Sviridenko, M.: Tight Approxima-
tion Algorithms for Maximum General Assignment Problems. In: Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, pp. 611–620 (2006)
7. Lee, Z.J., Su, S.F., Chuang, C.C., Liu, K.H.: Genetic Algorithm with Ant Colony
Optimization (GA-ACO) for Multiple Sequence Alignment. Applied Soft. Comput-
ing 8(1), 55–78 (2008)
8. Maniezzo, V., Colorni, A.: The Ant System Applied to the Quadratic Assignment
Problem. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 11(5), 769–778
(1999)
9. Michalewicz, Z.: Genetic Algorithms + Data Structures = Evolution Programs.
Springer, Heidelberg (1999)
10. Nemati, S., Basiri, M.E., Ghasem-Aghaee, N., Aghdam, M.H.: A Novel ACO-GA
Hybrid Algorithm for Feature Selection in Protein Function Prediction. Expert
Systems with Applications: An International Journal 36(10), 12086–12094 (2009)
11. Silva, C.A., Sousa, J.M.C., Runkler, T.A.: Rescheduling and Optimization of Lo-
gistic Processes Using GA and ACO. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence 21(3), 343–352 (2008)
12. Yang, J., Luo, Z.: Coalition Formation Mechanism in Multi-agent Systems Based
on Genetic Algorithms. Applied Soft. Computing 7(2), 561–568 (2007)

Updatable Multi-agent OSGi Architecture
for Smart Home System
Piotr Jaszczyk1 and Dariusz Kr´ol2
1 Faculty of Computer Science and Management,
Wroc/suppresslaw University of Technology, Poland
piotr.jaszczyk@student.pwr.wroc.pl
2 Institute of Informatics,
Wroc/suppresslaw University of Technology, Poland
dariusz.krol@pwr.wroc.pl
Abstract. Smart home is an adaptive system that controls house to
make household members’ life easier. There are plenty of not yet re-
searched issues concerning this concept, such as the ability to update the
architecture during system runtime. This paper presents a solution how
to design such system on the JADE framework. To solve the problem
of on-the-ﬂy update, each agent needs to work in an OSGi environment.
The proposal of new architecture is evaluated by means of the use case
technique.
1 Introduction
Smart Home can be deﬁned as home that is able to acquire and apply knowledge
about its inhabitants and their surroundings in order to adapt to the inhabitants
and meet the goal of comfort and eﬃciency [4]. In other words, the role oft h e
system ist o help inhabitants in theire very-dayl ife by performings ome actions
instead oft h e m.F urthermore, the system shoulda lso take into consideration
consumption oft h er e sources (e.g.w ater andp ower)i no rder to minimize costs.
There are many possiblet ypes ofa r c hitecture andt opologyw hich can be used
to builda Smart Home System (SHS) [2]. Traditionally, it isf ounded on centrally
managed architecture.I n this approach there isas e t ofh ome appliances which
are controlled by as ingled evice (often called home orr e sidential gateway) [7].
However, centralized architecture has many disadvantages [10]: it isu nreliable
and nots c alable.I n case ofc entral device failure, the wholes ystem isu nablet o
work.M oreover, that approach was constructed when most ofd evices have little
ore venn o processingp ower.N o wadays, many home appliances are equipped in
considerablep rocessingp ower,w hich factopensap a t hto ubiquitous computing.
Smart Home consists ofm any sensors ande ﬀectors,w hich are d istributed
over the entire house.A l lthe devices gather information froms ensors andr e-
act in personalized, trained manner to make changes in theire nvironment.T hey
shouldb ea blet ow ork evenw ith incomplete data and wheno ther devices are out
of order.M ulti-agents ystems (MAS) appear to be ano bvious choice ifr e q uire-
ments ofd istributed reasoning in heterogeneous environmenta r ep r e s ented. Each
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 370–379, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Updatable Multi-agent OSGi Architecture for Smart Home System 371
agent isa n autonomous piece ofs oftware which has intelligence to accomplish its
own design goals, as well as self-conﬁguration, self-optimization, self-healing, and
self-protection [9].
There are, however, ap lentyo f other issues concerningd e signo f SHS. Many
of them are prese nted in [5]. First problem is the fact that researchers des ign
fully-developed systems in top-down manner, despite the fact that in reality
peopleb uyn ew devices continuously. That is why, architecture shouldp rovide
some mechanisms fors ystem extension. Moreover,i ts houldb ea blet ow ork even
in notf ully-developed state.A n other challenge is impromptu interoperability –
ability toi nterconnect devices produced by diﬀerentm anufacturers.T he case of
SHS consisting off ew subsystems,w hich are nota blet o communicate isu nac-
ceptable.I n addition, householdm e m b e r sa r enote xpected to perform complex
administration tasks.I n fact,S H Sshould work with as littleu s e rinterference
as possible.
Architecture design shoulda lso allow devices to update its components.I t
meanst h a twhenn ewv ersion ofs oftware appears,i ts houldb ee a sily anda u to-
matically installed duringt h eoperation oft h esystem.T he requirement ofp e r-
forminga d ministration tasks on-the-ﬂy iss p e ciﬁcally important in SHS, which
ise xpected to run continuously without the need to restart the wholes ystem.
This paper advocates the idea that the SHS architecture shouldp rovide on-
the-ﬂy installation andu p d a t eofs oftware.I t isb a s e don multi-agent JADE
framework andO SGi speciﬁcation. JADE (Java Agent Development Frame-
work)i sap latform that s implifyi mplementation of MAS. It isc ompliantt o
FIPA (Foundation for Intelligent PhysicalA gents) speciﬁcations, thus ensures
that JADE based age nts cani nteroperate with other FIPA-compliant agents.
JADEp rovides programmer with a plentyo ff e a t u r e sincluding message inter-
change, simpliﬁed action (behaviour) creation andb uilt-in services like:A M S
(Agent Management System), DF (DirectoryF acilitator), andt h eACC (Agent
Communication Channel). More informati o no nJ A DEc an be found in [3].
OSGiTM[1] isa widely adapted standard whose basica im, amongm any others,
ist oi ntegrate ofm ultiplec omponents to form a new application. Each compo-
nent (bundle)i sa JAR (Java ARchive)w ith some meta information about it.
Itc an then be deployed on Java VirtualM achine (JVM) andc ommunicate with
other bundles viae xposed services.B undles can be installed andu p d a t e don
runninga p plications,w hich empowers systems to extenda ndu p d a t eon-the-
ﬂy. The wholef r a m ework works in as ingle JVM. OSGii ntroduces concept of
“private packages”. Ita lso provides some standardized services, e.g.L og Service,
Preferences Service,H ttp Service,U P n PService.M ore information on OSGi
and JADE integration can be found in [8] and [11], while on SOA andO SGi
integration in [12].
The rest oft hisp a p e ris organized as follows.S ection 2p r e s ents detailed view
ofp roposed architecture.L ater on, in Section 3, the architecture ise valuated on
the basis of the usage scenarios.F i nally, Section 4p r e s ents conclusionsa nds ome
future research directions.

372 P. Jaszczyk and D. Kr´ ol
2 Architecture of SHS
Thisp a p e rs howsh ow toi ntegrate JADEa ndO SGi to provide SHS with pos-
sibilities ofe xtension, update ands elf-optimization. The extension allowsu s e r
toi nstall new devices.T he installed devices can be nextu p d a t e dwith a new
version ofs oftware.H avingt a k eni nto consideration the system extension possi-
bility, SHSshoulda lso check if new architecture still optimizes devices’ processing
power.A l lthese actionsa r eexecuted during normal system operation.
Architecture consists oft h r e etypes ofd evices and iss hown in Fig.1 :
– Agent-Less Devices (ALD), which are note q uipped with much processing
power, thus they cannotc ontain full JVM wi th running agents.H o wever,
they can serves ome services, accessible via FIPA ACL messages or other
standardized protocol (KNX, X10). ALD wouldb eu s u ally portabled evices
powered by batteries andd evices in which incorporatingm u c hm e mory and
processingp ower iss till notp roﬁtable, fore xample:w atches,L CD photo
frames, coﬀee makers, toasters,l ight bulbs, faucets,T RVs.
– Agent Devices (AD) provide enough memory andp rocessingp ower to run
Javaa p plications.T hisg roup includes devices such as television sets, set-top
boxes, refrigerators, central heatingu nits.
– Main Device (MD), as p e cial case of AD, which incorporates JADE’s Main
Container.I tc an be nearly any AD device which ise q uipped with the access
to the Internet.T here can be only one MD in the entire SHS.
ALD are devices which, for various reasons, cannots e rve JVM. However, they
are capablet o communicate with remote agent vias ome standardized protocol.
Each ALD exposes simples e rvice with methods used to manipulate device: turn-
on, turn-oﬀ, make-coﬀee, change-channel, heat-up.H o wever,A L Dservices are
accessible only through agentd e ployed on anA D– the front-end.T his agent
Internet
Agent-Less Device
Hardware
Operational logic
Main Device Agent Device
Jade platform
Agent
Agent
Agent
JVM
Hardware
Agent
Agent
Agent
JVM
Hardware
OSGi platform OSGi platform
Fig. 1. Proposed architecture of Smart Home System

Updatable Multi-agent OSGi Architecture for Smart Home System 373
containss ome higher-levell ogic (such asintelligence and learning) andu s e sALD
services to accomplish its own goals. On the other hand,A Dsa nd MD are ca-
pablet oi ncorporate OSGi platforms.T here are some JADE agents deployed on
each platform. Each agents hould be packaged in a separate bundle, so that the
services provided can be placed on diﬀerentd evices.A t least one agent ism anda-
tory: Device Management Agent. Originally, device contains only one DMA and
its own service agent, fore xampleh i-ﬁd evice contains DMA and HiFiAgent.
DMA isr e s ponsiblef orm anaging (installation, update a nds oo n )o f agents
set up on local OSGi platform.I ta lso checks health of local OSGi platform –
monitors memory andC PU usage.
Installation of new device can be divided into three cases:A L D ,A Dor MD. In
ﬁrst case, after connecting ALD, its ends a message toM Dw ith information that
it wants to be a part oft h esystem.M D downloads device’sd river (agentb undle
with device front-end) fromt h eInternet repository. Next,i ta s k sall ADs ift h ey
can don ew device’ss e rvice.T he respond isb a s e don the information gathered
byD M As (memory& CPU usage) and, also, on the information sent within the
message (requisite memory andp rocessingp ower, estimated frequencyo f usage
ands oo n ) .Then, MD selects oned evice anda s k sitt oi nstall previously down-
loaded bundle.L ater on, agentr e gisters itself in JADE’s Yellow Pages Service
ands t a r t stoo perate byi n v oking ALD services (via ACL messages ors ome other
protocol). In case of AD, the procedure isr a t h e rs t r aightforward.A fter plugging
in, itr e gisters on the Yellow Pages Service. Optionally, itc an download updates
toi ts own agentr ight after installation. The installation ofa newM Di ss imilar
to the installation of AD. However, the architecture demands presence of only
one MD. Therefore, before registration on Yellow Pages Services, device checks
whether the other MD isp r e s ent.I ft his ist h ec a s e,i tc onnects itselft o existing
main container ands t a r t soperatinga sar e g ular AD.
Fromt ime to time,A Dsa s kMD ift h e r ea r eany updates to the hosted bundles.
In thisc a s e,M D downloads a newv ersion of the bundlef romt h er e pository and
serves itt h rough HTTP Service, so that the devices cani nstall it locally.
Another aspect of the proposed architecture is its self-optimization. The in-
formation about agents’ hardware requirements provided during installation is
only an estimation. Itc ano bviously varyi n diﬀerente nvironments.I fd evice’s
DMA concludes that itc ann ol o nger serves p e ciﬁc agent its ends messages to
other devices,w hether they can serve the agent or not.T he procedure iss imilar
as in the case of installation.
3 Application Scenario
In this section, an example ofas ystem behaviour in particular situations isp r e-
sented.F irstly, we need to consider the situation when au s e rb uysa new device
andt ries toi nstall it in the runnings ystem.N ext, the description oft h esystem’s
behaviour during normalo peration will be provided.T he message interchange is
described in terms of utterances (communicativea c t s) and locutions (messages).
The detailed presentation ofe a c hlocution can be found in Section 3.3.

374 P. Jaszczyk and D. Kr´ ol
3.1 Installing New Device
In the usage scenario the user tries to connect just-bought bathtub with a run-
nings ystem.W e assume that the bathtubis note q uipped with much processing
power, soi tc annotc ontain the fully functional agent.T hat is why, the manu-
facturer also provides the user with a software agent which acts as a front-end
to the bathtub’ss imples e rvices.
Followingd evices and agents are aﬀected duringe xecution of the described
use case (see Fig. 2):
– SD (Selected Device)– ap a r ticular device selected during use case execution,
– cDMA (CentralD evice Management Agent)– an agentd e ployed on MC,
which helps manage (installation, update ands oo n )devices set up in SHS,
– BD (Bathtub Device)– ad evice itself (bathtub with faucet),
– BA (Bathtub Agent)– a bathtub agentd e ployed on the other device (with
more processingp ower),
– DMA (Device Management Agent)– an agentd e ployed on ap a r ticular de-
vice,w hich isr e s ponsiblef orm anaging (install, update ands oo n )of agents
set up on local OSGi platform,
– HTTP (HTTP service)– an OSGi HTTP service,
– MC (Main Container)–J A DEp latform’sm ain container device,
– YPS (Yellow Pages Service)– the namings e rvice deployed on MC.
The use case:
1. After connecting BD into power itr e gisters itself in the network (via DHCP
ors imilar protocol). Next,i ts ends broadcast message toi nform cDMA that
a new device is now part oft h esystem, see Fig.3 (a).
U1:B D
L1
−−−→ cDMA
2. cDMA downloads fromt h eInternet Repository( placed outside oft h esys-
tem) ad evice driver.D river is packaged as an OSGi bundle. cDMA saves
bundle in his local storage,w hich is accessibleb yo ther agents via HTTP
protocol, see Fig.3 (a).
Fig. 2. Installing new device – architecture scheme

Updatable Multi-agent OSGi Architecture for Smart Home System 375
MC
RepoL₁ L₂
L₃
BD
(a)
MC
Device 1 Device 2
L₄
(b)
MC
Device 1 Device 2
L₅
(c)
MC
Device 1 (SD)
L₆
L₂
(d)
MCBD
Device 1 (SD) L₇
(e)
Fig. 3. Messages interchanged during installing new device - use case
U2: cDMA
L2
−−−→ Internet Repository
U3: cDMA
L3
−−−→ HTTP
3. cDMA selects devices which can act as a bathtub fr ont-end.T he choice is
based fore xample on the location. Then, cDMA sends correspondingm e s-
sages to selected devices’D M As.M essage containst h er e q uisite processing
power ande s timated frequencyo f usage, among other things, see Fig.3 (b).
U4: cDMA
L4
−−−→ DMAs
4.A fter receiving the proposal, agents decide whether they can act as a device
front-end or not.T he decision isb a s e don supplied information and own
state.N ext, they reply to cDMA, see Fig.3 (c).
U5:D M As
L5
−−−→ cDMA
5. If no device agrees t o the proposal cDMA sets MCa sas e lected device.
Otherwise, cDMA selects oned evice fromt hose that replied to the proposal
positively. Next,i ts ends the acknowledge massage with information about
the driver bundlet o the selected DMA, see Fig.3 (d).
U6: cDMA
L6
−−−→ DMA
U7:D M A
L2
−−−→ HTTP
6. DMA downloads a device driver (actually BA) fromt h er e pository and in-
stalls it intoi ts local OSGi platform.D uring installation, BA registers itself
on Yellow Pages Service.N ext,B A can communicate with BD anda c ta s
BD’sf ront-end agent, see Fig.3 (e).
U8:B A
L7
−−−→ YPS

376 P. Jaszczyk and D. Kr´ ol
3.2 Normal Operation
In this use case, there isad e s c ription ofas imples c enario involving just-installed
bathtub.
Followingd evices and agents are aﬀected duringt h eexecution of the described
use case:
– BA (Bathtub Agent)– a bathtub agentd e ployed on other device thanB D ,
– BD (Bathtub Device)– a bathtub device (bathtub with faucet),
– ERA( Energy Resource Agent)– an agent which distributes a n electric
power,
– UPDA (User Presence Detector Agent)– an agent which detects whether
speciﬁc householdm e m b e risp r e s enta th ome,
– WRA( Water Resource Agent)– an agent which distributes colda ndh ot
water.
The use case:
1. UPDA detects that a certain person came back home.T hen, it informs agents
that previously subscribed thisk ind of information about user’sa c tion. One
of these agents is BA, see Fig. 4(a).
U9:U P D A
L8
−−−→ BA
2.B A “knows”that the user bathe every time he comes back home.B ecause all
preconditionsa r em e t(eg.n obodyi sb a t hing)i t wants to prepare a bath.T o
accomplish thist a s kit needs some water.H ence,i ta s k sWRAi f itc an use
some particular amount of water.W RA allows BA to use requested amount
of water, see Fig. 4(b)
U10:B A
L9
−−−→ WRA
U11:W RA
L10
−−−→ BA
3. B athtub isa blet o produce whirlpools in water, but to turno n a spa program
itr e q uires some energy. Ith a st o ask ERAi f itc an consume particular
amount ofe nergy, see Fig. 4(c).
U12:B A
L9
−−−→ ERA
ERA responses, that CMA can use some power, but in less amountt h an
requested.
U13: ERA
L10
−−−→ BA
BA decides to use energy-saver spa program (itp roduces less whirlpools but
still has a relaxingp roperty).
4.B A requests BD to prepare a bath usinge nergy-saver program, see Fig. 4(d).
U14:B A
L11
−−−→ BD
3.3 Locutions in Scenarios
Locutionsa r esimply ACL messages as described in the FIPA speciﬁcation. De-
scription ofp a r ticular locutions interchanged duringe valuation ofb oth use cases
follows:

Updatable Multi-agent OSGi Architecture for Smart Home System 377
Device 1
L₈
(a)
Device 2Device 1 L₉
L₁₀
(b)
Device 2Device 1 L₉
L₁₀
(c)
BD
Device 1 L₁₁
(d)
Fig. 4. Messages interchanged during normal operation - use case
– Locution L1: introduce(info-description)
New device introduces itself in SHS. info-description is a structure deﬁned in
the same way as in the FIPA Device OntologyS peciﬁcation [6]. Itc ontains
ad evice name, a vendor name andad e vice version.
– Locution L2: get-driver-bundle(info-description[, repository-url])
cDMA downloads a bundlef romt h em anufacturer’sr e pository containing
the driver (agent) used to manage device described by info-description.I t is
also executed byo ther DMAst o download bundlef rom MD’s HTTP Service.
repository-urlis needed only for initial download ofd rivers fromt h eInternet.
Next itm ay be cached anda s sociated with a vendor.
– Locution L3: publish-bundle(info-description, bundle-ﬁle)
Publishes a bundle in the local repository, which is accessibleb y all agents.
– Locution L4: propose-serving(min-hw-spec, est-usage-freq)
cDMA asks other DMAs ift h ey can servea n additional agent.T his locution
isd e rived fromt h epropose ACL message, thus ita lso contains parameters
deﬁned in the FIPA Speciﬁcations [6]. min-hw-spec isas t r u c t u r econtaining
main ande xternal memory usage, requisite processingp ower and others.I t
can be based on FIPA’s hw-description. est-usage-freq is number oft imes
device’ss e rvices will probably be executed in some time period (fore xample
bathtub usage can be estimated as numberOfUsers/day .
– Locution L5: answer-serving-proposal(degree-of-acceptance)
This locution isa n answer to“ servingp roposal” andt a k e sform of FIPA
reject-proposal or accept-proposal ACL message.T he degree-of-acceptance
(number from 0 to1 ) tellsh ow much the spec iﬁed device iss uitablet o
servingt h enew agent.0i n dicates that device cannots e rvet his agent.
– Locution L6: serve(proposal-id, device-id, info-description)
cDMA requests the selected DMA to serveas p e ciﬁed bundle.L ocution con-
tains proposal-id, thus DMA can check if itp r eviously accepted the proposal.
device-id identifyA L Di na way further used by driver, eg.I P address. info-
description isu s e dto download bundleu sing get-driver-bundle.

378 P. Jaszczyk and D. Kr´ ol
– Locution L7: register(df-agent-description)
Registers ani nstalled agent in the Yellow Pages Agent.T his locution is
deﬁned in the FIPA Agent Management Speciﬁcation [6].
– Locution L8: inform-result(event, params)
After detectings ome eventa n agent informs other agents (which previously
subscribed such information) about its occurrence. event ist h etype ofa n
eventa nd paramsare additional parameters which vary between eventt ypes.
– Locution L9: request-resource(amount, duration)
Agents sends this message to resource agent (fore xample WRA) in order to
request usage ofs ome amount ofr e source in estimated time represented as
duration.
– Locution L10: resource-response(allowed, amount, duration)
Resource agentr e s ponses too ther agent if itc an use resource (allowed).
amount and duration are allowed resource usage.
– Locution L11: invoke-device-service(method, params)
Invoke speciﬁed method ofas e r vice exposed by device.T his message ca n
be transported via varietyo fp rotocols including JADE’s one,U P n P ,K N X
or X10.
4 Conclusion and Future Research
In this research, an architecture which tries to solveaf e w problems that may
occur whiled eveloping Smart Home Systems has been developed.F irst problem
is“The Accidentally Smart Home”,see [5]. The vast majorityo fs m a r thomes are
notb uild in the ground-up approach.P eople will upgrade theire xistingh ouses
by buying new smart devices (architecture upgrade). The proposed architecture
allows new devices toi ntegrate andc ooperate with the existings ystem. Other
issue is the upgrade ofd evices’ agents (software upgrade). Software isc ontinu-
ously andr a pidly developing, thus the need ofs ome mechanism of upgrading.
Nextp roblem which proposed architecture tries to solve ist h ea r c hitecture self-
optimization. Since the arch itecture will be continuously changingt h e r em ay
occur neww ays of agents’ distribution. The result isa no pen, expandable agent
architecture implemented on the JADEa ndO SGi platforms.
However there are few more issues which shouldb ec onsidered in future work.
Probably the most important one is security. While installinga new device it
registers itself in the cDMA via wireless network.B ut what ifu s e r’s neighbour
also has goth is own SHS. It is needed to register new device in device’s owner’s
system.T hism ay be solved by settinga WiFi network name.A n other possibility
ist o register device manually, vias ome kind ofs hort-distance network (e.g.
Bluetooth). This aspect still needs more research.
Another problem isas ystem scalability. In case of SHS the proposed archi-
tecture should work with goodp e r formance.B ut if wee xtendt h esystem to any
Smart Environment (fore xample Smart Company ore venS mart City) there
mayo ccur some scalability problems.T hey can be solved by grouping agents
into subsystems (e.g. by function, by spatiall ocation, by used resources). After

Updatable Multi-agent OSGi Architecture for Smart Home System 379
choosingt h eg roupings t r a t e gy there may be created a hierarchica r c hitecture,
based on the proposed one.M Ca c t sa ss u b t r e e’sr oot in ag lobal tree-like archi-
tecture anda llows inter-group communication. Nevertheless thisp roblem also
needs more research.
In the future we intendt oi mplement SHS simulatoru sing the proposed ar-
chitecture anda nalyse its performance.T he further step ist e s tingu s a bilityo f
presented approach to see if the design goalsa r em e tin practice.
References
1. About the OSGi Service Platform. Technical Whitepaper Revision 4.1. OSGi
Aliance (2007)
2. Aiello, M., Dustdar, S.: Are our homes readyf o rs e r v i c e s ?Ad o m otic infrastructure
based on the Web service stack. Pervasive and Mobile Computing 4, 506–525 (2008)
3. Caire, G., Greenwood, D.: Developing Multi-Agent Systems with JADE. John Wi-
ley & Sons, Chichester (2007)
4. Cook, D.J., Youngblood, M.: Smart Homes. In: Berkshire Encyclopedia of Human-
Computer Interaction, Berkshire Publishing Group (2004)
5. Edwards, W.K., Grinter, R.E.: At Home with Ubiquitous Computing: Seven Chal-
lenges. In: Abowd, G.D., Brumitt, B., Shafer, S. (eds.) UbiComp 2001. LNCS,
vol. 2201, pp. 256–272. Springer, Heidelberg (2001)
6. Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents. FIPA Speciﬁcations,
http://www.fipa.org/repository/standardspecs.html
7. Gu, T., Pung, H.K., Zhang, D.Q.: Toward an OSGi-Based Infrastructure for
Context-Aware Applications. IEEE Pervasive Computing 3(4), 66–74 (2004)
8. Kim, N.H., Jeong, Y.S., Ryu, S.H., Shin, D.R.: Mobile Healthcare System based
on Collaboration between JADE and OSGi for Scalability. In: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering, pp. 126–129.
IEEE Computer Society, Washington (2007)
9. L´opez de Vergara, J.E., Villagr´a, V.A., Fad´on, C., Gonz´aez, J.M., Lozano, J.A.,
Campana, M.A.: An autonomic approach to oﬀer services in OSGi-based home
gateways. Computer Communications 31(13), 3049–3058 (2008)
10. Roberts, L.G., Wessler, B.D.: Computer network development to achieve resource
sharing. In: Proceedings of the AFIPS Joint Computer Conference, pp. 543–549.
ACM, New York (1970)
11. Velasco, J.R., Maestre, I.M., Navarro, A., L´opez, M.A., Vicente, A.J., de la Hoz, E.,
Paricio, A., Machuca, M.: Location-aware Services and Interfaces in Smart Homes
using Multiagent Systems. In: Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on
Pervasive Systems and Computing, pp. 104–110. CSREA Press (2005)
12. Wu, C.L., Liao, C.H., Fu, L.C.: Service-Oriented Smart-Home Architecture Based
on OSGi and Mobile-Agent Technology. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics–Part C: Applications and Reviews 37(2), 193–205 (2007)

An Approach to Evaluate the Impact
of Web Traﬃc in Web Positioning
Pawe/suppresslK o walski1 and Dariusz Kr´ol2
1 Faculty of Computer Science and Management,
Wroc/suppresslaw University of Technology, Poland
Pawel.Kowalski@student.pwr.wroc.pl
2 Institute of Informatics,
Wroc/suppresslaw University of Technology, Poland
Dariusz.Krol@pwr.wroc.pl
Abstract. Search engine algorithms are constantly changing. One of
the factors that can gain importance in these algorithms is measurable
web traﬃc. This fact can aﬀect the web positioning techniques. The aim
of this article is to evaluate the impact of users activity on the website
position in Google search result pages. The paper presents an approach
to generate a web traﬃc visible for search engines. However, click fraud
protection in search engines requires this traﬃc to be human-like in or-
der to avoid having been ﬁltered. A multi-agent system seems to be the
reasonable solution to this issue. It allows to generate distributed web
traﬃc. If appropriate algorithm to coordinate agents is used, the system
should imitate human activity more and, therefore, be more user-friendly.
Keywords: click fraud, PageRank, search engine optimization, web po-
sitioning, web traﬃc.
1 Introduction
The early search engines like AltaVista or Lycos were launched around 1994–
1995 [4]. They used algorithms only fora nalysis oft h econtent of websites and
keywords in meta tags.I t was easy to circumventt h e s ealgorithms by placing
false information into keywords tags.A n other popular fraud was ﬁlling website
content with irrelevantt ext,w hich was visible only fors e a r c henginer obots, but
notf or the user.A sar e s ult, search results contained websites ﬁlled with spam
and inappropriate content [10].
Googlec ompany, which started in September 1999, revolutionized search en-
gines.I ts co-founders,L arryP age and SiergiejB rin, developed PageRank al-
gorithm [2]. Thisa lgorithm redeﬁned web positioningp roblem. Content oft h e
websites became less signiﬁcant. PageRank rates the websites mainly on the ba-
sis ofq u antity andq u alityo f links leadingt o these websites.W ith help ofs u c h
improvements, the Internet works as a k ind of votings ystem. Every link isa
vote fort his website which leads to.
Nevertheless, after a sh ort time, the techniques [10] spoilingt h er e s ults of
PageRankh avea lso been discovered.B asically, most oft h e mwork in such a
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 380–389, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

An Approach to Evaluate the Impact of Web Traﬃc in Web Positioning 381
way toi ncrease the number of links leadingt o ap a r ticular website to enhance
its PageRank value.S uch activityi n a large scale isu s u ally called linkbaiting.
There are ma ny scripts and web catalogs to facilitate andt o automate such
activity. However, Google isa lso constantly workingt oi mprovet h eirs e a r c h
enginea lgorithm.T hey try to make itr e sistantt o linkbaiting.A ccordingt o[ 7],
many new factors are being introduced intow ebsites evaluation process,i no rder
to reduce the impact of linkbaiting.
Its e e m st h a tt h enexts t e pin search engines improvement ist r a c kingr e g-
ular users in the Internet. Collectingd a t aon theira c tivity might giveu s e f ul
information about which websites are valuable.T he importance oft hisf a c tor
seems to be slowly increasing.M oreover, such ani ndicatorm ay be much more
time-eﬃcientt h an links indexing.S earch enginer obots, hereafter crawlers [12],
don oth avet o spendm u c htime crawlingt h eInternet and lookingf or links to
particular website.I nstead, users instantly send information about which web-
sites are interestingf ort h e m.T hisr aises further issues like how to collect, ﬁlter
and interpret information of web traﬃc to make itu s e f ul.
In thisp a p e rwes how an approach toi n vestigate the importance of web traﬃc
fors e a r c hengines.I ft h er e s ults oft his research are positive,i tm ayi ntroduce
neww eb positioningm e t hods.
2 The Analysis of Data Collecting by Google
Google ist h emost popular ands till the most advanced search engine.M oreover,
other search e ngines probably have very diﬀerentm e t hods ofc ollectingd a t a
about theiru s e r s’ activity. Fort hisr e a son, the Googles e a r c hengine ist h eonly
onet a k eni nto consideration in thiss t u dy.
2.1 What Data Google Collects
Crawlers continuously gather information froma lmost everyw ebsite on the In-
ternet.L et us call thisk ind ofd a t astatic, because it ism ainly stored on static
web servers. Everybody knowst h a tGooglec ollects enormous amount ofs t a tic
data.T he reason fort his is that these data ha vet h eg r e a t e s tsigniﬁcance for
search enginea lgorithm, thus classic web positioningm e t hods are basedon links
maintenance, mainly the acquisition oft h e m.
Googlep rocesses the staticd a t aands orts the websites accordingt oi ts value
to the user.U ser sends queries to the search enginea nd gets appropriate Search
Engine Results Page, hereafter SERP. Because Googlek nows what peoples e a r c h,
they are ablet o determinet h epopularityo fs p e ciﬁc information on the Internet.
But eventually, it is the user who decides which website is valuablef orh ima nd
which is not.T he value ofap a r ticular website isr eﬂected in users’ activity–
websites whose links haveb e en clicked andt ime between these actions.T hese
information isc alled dynamic data.
It isr e a sonablet o make all thisd a t au s e f ul fors e a r c hengine. Certainly,Google
knowst h a t, too. Probably this ist h er e a son why they collect enormous amount
ofd ynamicd a t ain addition to staticd a t a.T hisk ind of information is what this
studyi st h emost interested in.

382 P. Kowalski and D. Kr´ ol
2.2 How Google Collects Dynamic Data
The entire web isb a s e don HTTP protocol which generates requests containing
following information:
– IP address of the user makingr e q u e s twhich can be used in geolocalization
oft hisu s e r,
– date andt ime ofr e q u e s t,
– language spoken by the user,
– operatings ystem of the user,
– browser of the user,
– address oft h e website which redirected user b y the linkt o the requested
website.
These HTTP requests are beingu s e dby Google in:
Click tracking – Google logs all of its users clicks on all of its services,
Forms – Google logs every piece of information typed into every sendingf orm,
Javascript executing – requests ands ometimes even more data are sent when
au s e r’sb rowser executes the script embedded in website,
Web Beacons – small (1 pixel by1 pixel) transparent images in its websites,
which cause sendingar e q u e s t severy time whileu s e r’sb rowser tries to down-
load such images,
Cookies – small text information stored on user’sc omputer which lets Google
track users’ movementa roundt h eweb every time when they get on any page
that has Googlea dvertisement.
2.3 Where Google Collects Dynamic Data
Google Search. The most eﬀective wayo f improving accuracyo fs e a r c hengine
isb y collectingd a t af rom the users who havea lready used Google’ss e rvices.
Trackingu s e r sa c tivityo n the SERPs isu s e f ul but note nough.I td oes notg ive
any information about:
– how much time user spent on the clicked website,
– ifh ec omes back to this website,
– if he has added thiss ite to bookmarks,
– ifh ec losed the website after few seconds because ofp oor-quality content.
What ism ore, a new mechanism based on cookies haveb e en recently introduced
on Google Search.I ta llowst ol earn about every user’s (alson ot logged in any
Google’ss e rvice) historyo fs e a r c hq u e ries fromt h elast 180 days. Oﬃcially it is
used to personalize SERPsa c cordingt o past interests of the user.
Google Analytics. Googlea lso provides other services which helpt o gather
such information andm u c hmore. One oft h e misG oogle Analytics that generates
detailed statistics about:

An Approach to Evaluate the Impact of Web Traﬃc in Web Positioning 383
– the visitors to the website,
– the previous website oft h evisitor,
– activity( navigation) of the user in the website.
It ist h emost popular and one oft h emost powerful tool to examinet h eweb
traﬃc on our website.I tg ives theowner a lot ofu s e f uli nformation about visitors
on his website.T his information is certainly veryi nterestingf ort h eGoogle itself.
Google Toolbar. Another Google’st ool which provides them with even more
valuabled a t aisG oogle Toolbar.I t ist h ep lug-in addingaf e wn ew features
to popular browsers, mainly aq uick access to Google’ss e rvices. One oft h e s e
features isc h e c kingt h e PageRank value for currently viewing webpage.T his
gives Googlet h einformation about everyw ebsite which the users with installed
Toolbar are viewing.
Google AdSense. There isa lso Google AdSense - contexta dvertisingp rogram
for website publishers.T here are millions of websites which uses thiss e rvice to
generate some ﬁnancial proﬁts fort h eira u t hors.T he eﬀect oft his ist h a tall these
websites are d isplaying ads pub lished by Google’ss e rvers.I tp rovides Google
with a similar information as Google Analytics andG oogle Toolbar.
Google Public DNS. The latest service launched by Google is Public DNS
(Domain Name System)[ 1 1 ] .It iss aidt o be faster andm ore secure thano thers
andt his ish ow Googlee ncourages us to start usingt h eir DNS. Itc an generate
massivea mount of information about web traﬃc . Every singleq u e ry to the
DNS can be analyzed byi ts provider.S o the more popular their DNS will be,
the better f orG oogle.I tc an provide a lot of information helpfulo n deﬁning
websites popularity.
But becauseof DNS cachingm e c h anisms [11], Googled on otg e tall the desired
information. DNS clients ends queryo n l ywhen he ors h ewants tov isitad omain
for the ﬁrst time.A fter he gets theIP address oft hisd omain from DNS, he caches
itf ora ni nterval determined by a value called time to live (TTL). Everyn ext
visit duringt his interval does nots enda ny query. Consequently, Google iss till
in need for other services to gather desired information about the act ivityo f
particular website’s visitors.
Other Google Services. Googleh a sother very popular services like fore xam-
ple YouTube, Google Maps etc.T hey allow users to embed objects like videos
orm a p son their own websites.I n this way they bringG oogle information much
like AdSense.
There are ma ny other waysf orG ooglet o gain the useful data [5]. In fact
Google itselfa d mits to the use ofa ll described techniques in its privacy policy
[8]. Most of these data are probably used by them toi mprove accuracyo ft h eir
search enginea ndq u alityo ft h eirs e rvices.P ersonalized search results in Google
Search are the proof oft hisp a p e r.

384 P. Kowalski and D. Kr´ ol
3 The System for Distributed Generation of Web Traﬃc
Weh aves hown that a lot ofd a t agoes into Googlea nd wek now a lot ofu s e f ul
manipulated data comes out.B ut wec ano n l yguess what happens in betweeno r
try tol earn fromt h eobservation of the data coming out ofG oogle. Evans wrote
[6] that identifying the factors involved in a search engine’s ranking algorithm
is extremely diﬃcult without a large dataset of millions of SERPs and extremely
sophisticated data-mining techniques.
That is why, only ano bservation, experience andc ommon sense are the main
source ofk nowledge on Search EngineO p timization (SEO) methods.I t was
accordingt o thisk nowledge that Search Engine Ranking Factors[7]w as created.
The last edition of ita s s u m e st h a tt r a ﬃ cg enerated by the visitors ofa webpage
has 7%o f importance in the Google’se valuation oft h e webpage value.I t is,
after links to the concrete webpage and its content value, the most signiﬁcant
factor in website evaluation process. On the basis of the previous editions oft h e
ranking,o nec ann otice that the importance oft hisf a c tor is increasing.
Because these all are only reasonable assumptions,o ur intention ist o evaluate
the validityl evelo f the descr ibed fact or in web p ositioninge ﬀorts.F ort his
purpose we need a s imulation tool w hich will generate necessary human-like
traﬃc on at e s t e dwebsite.T he tool isg oingt o be a multi-agents ystem (MAS)
which will imitate realv isitors oft h ewebsites.
3.1 Problems to Solve
Fig.1 presents the ma in reason why the system must be d istributed.A few
queries to Google, haveb e en sentf r e q u ently onea f t e ranother fromt h es a m e
IP address, are detected by Googlea nd treated as abuse . Google suspects a n
automated activity andr e q uires completion o ft h e captcha form in order to
continue searching.I n case ofu singt h edistributed system, the queries wouldb e
sentf romm any diﬀerent IP addresses.I ts houldg u a r antee, that Google will not
Fig. 1. Information displayed by Google on the abuse detection

An Approach to Evaluate the Impact of Web Traﬃc in Web Positioning 385
consider this issue abusing.T his issue cannotb es olved by usingas e t of public
proxy servers. Googleh a sp robably put them into theirb lack list. Every single
query to Google vias u c hp roxy server leads to t h es a m eend – captcha request.
What ism ore, after Tuzhilin [14]w ec an say that Google puts a lot ofr e a son-
ablee ﬀort intoi n validc licks on advertisementﬁ ltering.T here isab igc h ance,
that some oft hose mechanism Googleu s e sin the analysis oft h e web traﬃc.
This ist h er e a son why generatingh u m an-like traﬃc shouldb e our concern. Rec-
ognized artiﬁcialw eb traﬃc couldb et r e a t e dby Googlea sa n abuse andc a u s e
beingp unished (decline of website position).
3.2 Objectives
Web Positioning. The main goalo ft h esystem ist oi mprovet h eposition of
a website by generating traﬃc related to the website.T he only activityw hich
can be visiblef orG ooglet h esystem shouldc a r eof.I ts hows that there is no
need to download all contentf romp a r ticular webpage.I t would only waste the
bandwidth.T he system should only sendt o Googles e rvices requests used by a
particular webpage, fore xample:
– links to the website on SERPs,
– Google Analytics scripts,
– Google Public DNS queries,
– Googlem e dia embedded on the webpage like AdSense advertisement, maps,
YouTube videos, calendars etc.
Cooperation. The whole idea oft h esystem ist o spread positioningt r a ﬃ cinto
world wide IP addresses.A sar e s ult oft hisd istributed character, the system
require a large group ofc ooperatingu s e r s.N obody will use the system ift h e r e
is no beneﬁts to him.A mechanism which will let the s ystem users t o share
their Internet connections in order to helpt h e m s elves in web positioningm u s t
be introduced.W hat ism ore, the mechanism must treat all users equally-fairly.
Itm e ans its hould nota llow to take beneﬁts without any contribution.
Control. Accordingt o[ 1 5 ] ,web positioning is notas inglea c tion, but a process.
Thisp rocess shouldb ea blet o be controlled. Otherwise itc ouldb ed e s t r u c tive,
instead of improvingt h e website position. Fort hisr e a son, the system should
allow users to:
– control the impact oft h esystem activityo n their websites,
– check the currentr e s ults oft h esystem activity( changes in the website po-
siti o no nSERPs),
– check the current state oft h ewebsite in the web positioningp rocess.
3.3 Architecture
Fig. 2p r e s ents the architecture oft h esystem which take under consideration
all speciﬁed problems and objectives. Server is necessary to control the whole

386 P. Kowalski and D. Kr´ ol
Fig. 2. System architecture
process ofg eneratingt h eweb traﬃc by speciﬁed algorithm.I tg ives the orders
for clients to start generatingt r a ﬃ con the speciﬁed websites.I ta lso gets the
information from clients with amount ofr e q u e s t ss entt o particular Google’s
services on the website account. Database serves as storage forp rocess statis-
tics.T hey can be presented to clients via web interface.T hey are also useful to
server forc r e a tingt h eorders in accordance with the algorithm.
Clients are the agents of the presented MAS. They take orders fromt h es e rver
with particular webiste registered in the database to be processed.P rocessing
the website ist o mimic its realv isitor. Clientp e r forms thisa u tonomously using
the visitors e s sion algorithm described in the next section.
3.4 Visitor Session Algorithm
Accordingt o many research [1], [3], [ 4], [6], [9] and [15], more than half ofa
website’s visits comes fromt h eSERPs.T hat is why startingt h esingle visitor
session (the sequence ofr e q u e s t sconsiderings ingle website registered in the sys-
tem)w ith queryingG oogle Search sounds reasonably. However,o n l yif currently
considered website appears on one of the ﬁrst fe wS ERPs. Otherwise,v isitor
session shouldb es t a r t e ddirectly on the processed website ors hould refer t o
ani ncoming link, but itm u s tb eexisting,i ft h e r eiss u c hone.B ecause oft h e
likely Google’sa c tions in order to detect abuses, the visitors e s sion shouldb e
possibly human-like.T he analysis ofr e al users web traﬃc [13] is very useful at
thism oment.A ccordingt oi t, at ypical user:
– visits about 22 pages in 5 websites in ones itting,
– follows 5 links before jump to a neww ebsite,
– spends about 2 hours per session and 5 minutes per page.

An Approach to Evaluate the Impact of Web Traﬃc in Web Positioning 387
Fig. 3. Algorithm
These statistics clearly indicate that typicalv isits e s sion concernsa website of
goodq u ality. Visit on ap oor website wouldb ea b orted as s oon as after fe w
seconds.S uch visitc ouldh avea negative impact on the website quality evaluation
by Google.
1 –S erver retrieves from the database information about the next website to be
processed.
2 –T ask assignation to the client.
3 – Clients t a r t st h evisitors e s sion.
4 –S earching on SERPsf ora linkt o the processed website.
5 –I fa linkh a sb e en found – click on the link,o therwise direct request.
6 –P rocessingt h evisits e s sion.
7 – Request to the server fora nother website to process.
3.5 Assignation Algorithm
Assignation algorithm helps server to buildaq u e u eofr e gistered websites ordered
by the visitors e s sion priority. The website with the highest value of the priority
ist h enext onet o start visitors e s sion. In other words, clienta lways receivet h e
website with the highest priorityv alue to process.
The priorityv alue PV isc alculated usingt h ef unction:
PV (α)= r(α)·
√
t(α)· v(α)
T(α) (1)
where
α — record in the system (website with phrase for web positioning)
r(α)— returns currentp osition in the search enginer ankingf ort h eα
(returns 0i ft h e r eis no α in the ranking)
t(α)— returnst ime since the end oft h elast visitors e s sion on the α (in
seconds)

388 P. Kowalski and D. Kr´ ol
v(α)— returns number of visitors e s sionsm a d eby α owner’sc lient
T(α)— returnst ime since the registration of α in the system (in days)
Presented function gives the highest ”power” to the rankingf a c tor.T he reason
fort his ist h a twebsites with high ranking value shouldh avem ore realv isitors,
so the system eﬀorts will notb es o crucial for its popularity.
Time ofp a r ticipation in the system is not very signiﬁcant.N o v ice participants
havee q u al chance to gain attention fort h eir websit e sa st h es enior ones.H o wever,
function promotes continuous activityo ft h eclients.
Worth to consider isa lso the possibility to dynamically modifyw eights of
individual factors depending on the results.B ecause oft h ef a c tt h a twebsites
queue isb uiltb y the server,i t isp ossiblet o change wholef unction duringt h e
system activity.
4C o n c l u s i o n
Generatinga r tiﬁcial traﬃc on the Internet seems to be not very praiseworthy as
it isd angerously close to spam appearance andc a u s e st h einformation noise into
visitors statistics. On the other hand, this is not worse thano ther SEO activities
like linkbaiting.
After [3], today’ss e a r c hengines use mainly link-popularity metricsto measure
the ”quality” of a page.I t ist h em ain idea oft h ePageRanka lgorithm.T hisf a c t
causes the ”rich-get-richer” phenomenon. More popular websites appear higher
on SERPs,w hich brings them more popularity.
Unfortunately, it is not very beneﬁcial fort h e new, unknown pages which
have notg ained popularityy et.T here isap ossibility, that these webpages con-
tain more valuable information than the popular ones.D espite thisf a c t, they
are ignored by search engines because ofs m all amount of links.T hese sites,i n
particular,n eed SEO eﬀorts.P robably classict e c hniques will be more eﬀective
than the onep r e s ented in thisp a p e r.
Nevertheless, the methods presented in thisa r ticlea r elikely toi mprovet h e
rate of web positioning, because web traﬃc ca n be noticed by search engines
immediately. It isq uite opposite to crawlers,w here itc anl asts much longer
time until they ﬁnd links to the considered webpages and will improvet h eir
ratings fors e a r c hengine.
Of course the best results shouldb eg iven by usingp r e s ented technique with
classical methods at the same t ime.I t wouldm imict h eg ain ofp opularityi n
the most naturalw ay. The amount of links leadingt o the webpage usually raises
linearly with the traﬃc a ndt h e number of visitors.H o wever, the present-day
SEO market focuses merely on classical methods.
To sum up, the aim oft hiss t u dyi st o show that methods based on manipu-
lation ofd ynamicd a t aa r eworth toi n v o l ve in the SEO eﬀorts.M oreover, these
methods don ot increase the amount ofs p a ms e en by the Internet users.I n con-
trast to classical methods,w hich some oft h e minvolveg eneratings t a ticd a t a
links andt exts with no value fore ndu s e r s.

An Approach to Evaluate the Impact of Web Traﬃc in Web Positioning 389
References
1. Bifet, A., Castillo, C., Chirita, P., Weber, I.: An Analysis of Factors Used in Search
Engine Ranking. In: First International Workshop on Adversarial Information Re-
trieval on the Web, pp. 48–57. Lehigh University, Bethlehem (2005)
2. Brin, S., Page, L.: The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine.
World Wide Web 7, 107–117 (1998)
3. Cho, J., Roy, S.: Impact of Web Search Engines on Page Popularity. World Wide
Web 13, 20–29 (2004)
4. Chu, H., Rosenthal, M.: Search Engines for the World Wide Web: A Comparative
Study and Evaluation Methodology. American Society for Information Science 33,
127–135 (1996)
5. Dover, D.: The Comprehensive List of All the Data Google Admits to
Collecting from Users, http://www.seomoz.org/user_files/google-user-data/
SEOmoz-Google-User-Data.pdf
6. Evans, M.P.: Analysing Google rankings through search engine optimization data.
Internet Research 17(1), 21–37 (2007)
7. Fishkin, R.: Search Engine Ranking Factors (2009),
http://www.seomoz.org/article/search-ranking-factors
8. Google Inc.: The Google Privacy Policy,
http://www.google.com/privacypolicy.html
9. Lawrence, S., Giles, C.L.: Searching the World Wide Web. Science 280, 98–100
(1998)
10. Ledford, J.L.: SEO: Search Engine Optimization Bible. Wiley Publishing, Inc.,
Indianapolis (2008)
11. Liu, C., Albitz, P.: DNS and BIND, 5th edn. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol (2006)
12. Pant, G., Srinivasan, P., Menczer, F.: Crawling the Web. In: Levene, M., Poulo-
vassilis, A. (eds.) Web Dynamics, pp. 153–178. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
13. Qiu, F., Liu, Z., Cho, J.: Analysis of User Web Traﬃc with a Focus on Search
Activities. Web and Databases 8, 103–108 (2005)
14. Tuzhilin, A.: The Lane’s Gifts v. Google Report,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/pdf/Tuzhilin_Report.pdf
15. Walter, A.: Building Findable Web Sites: Web Standards SEO and Beyond. New
Riders, Berkeley (2008)

P. Jędrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 390–399, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Agent System for Managing Distributed  
Mobile Interactive Documents  
Magdalena Godlewska 
Gdańsk University of Technology 
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Informatics 
ul. Narutowicza 11/12, 80-952 Gdańsk 
magdal@eti.pg.gda.pl 
Abstract. The MIND architecture of distributed mobile interactive document is 
a new processing model defined for facilitate informed decision-making in non-
algorithmic decision-making processes carried out by knowledge-based organi-
zations. The aim of this architecture is to  change the static document to mobile 
agents, which are designed to implement the structure of the organization 
through autonomous migration between knowledge workers in accordance with 
the built-in policy. An extensible functi onality of the agents also extends the 
static document to interface unit. The prototype of the agent system, based on 
the MIND architecture, shows the possibi lity of its implementation using avail-
able technology. The case studies provide the possibility of using architecture to 
solve specific decision problems with external knowledge of organization’s 
workers. 
Keywords: Agent system, collaborative computing, knowledge-based organi-
zations, policy-driven management, interactive documents. 
1   Introduction 
MIND architecture  of distributed mobile interactive document is a new processing 
model. Traditionally electronic documents have been treated as static objects 
downloaded from a server or sent by an e-mail. The MIND provides for exchange of 
static documents into a set of mobile agents, that can migrate between authors accord-
ing to a fixed migration policy. 
The MIND architecture makes possible a radical shift from data-centric distributed 
systems, with hard-coded functionality, to flexible document-centric ones, where only 
generic services are provided by local environments, while specialized functionality is 
embedded in migrating document components.  
In order to verify the assumptions of the MIND architecture and its possible  
implementation with the use of available technology, a set of prototype tools was 
implemented. This set of tools can be defined as an environment for designing and 
managing document migration. Among these tools is a document editor that supports 
the design of documents in accordance with the assumptions of the MIND architec-
ture and agent system that allows management components of documents.

Agent System for Managing Distributed Mobile Interactive Documents 391 
The aim of research on this architecture is to develop a new model of object proc-
essing based on a system consisting of migrant components. Each document compo-
nent is intelligent because of built-in functionality and mobile because of capabilities 
of migration in the system according to the inscribed policy. Workflow description 
language supported by the agent system will perform the workflow control-flow pat-
terns, which are used in decision-making processes involving documents. Intelligent 
and mobile components form the MIND architecture that supports decision-making 
by participants in collaborative computing of virtual knowledge-based organizations. 
In this paper the author presents the general assumptions of the MIND architecture, 
describes the elements of the agent system for managing distributed mobile docu-
ments and shows case studies that use the MIND architecture. 
2   Related Work 
The presented proposal combines existing technologies and new idea to extract some 
new functionality in the topics of distributed electronic document and collaborative 
environments. Unmarshalling and marshalling [1] allow XML documents [2] to be 
switched from static to dynamic form. Full distribution guarantees convenience of 
working in group and minimizes needs to connect with central server. Proposed solu-
tion differs from collaborative editing problem (algorithms solving that problem are 
introduced e.g. in [3]-[5]). Collaborative editing is the situation when users edit 
together the same document (the same part of document). This paper introduces 
problem when users work on different parts of one document. 
It is worth mentioning that the proposal is something different than shared work-
space (e.g. BSCW – Basic Support for Cooperative Work [6]) or repository (e.g. CVS 
- Concurrent Versions System [7]). Those concepts are based on server. Users are 
able to upload and download some objects (documents, sources etc.), to communicate 
with other users, to be informed about some restrictions like deadlines. But most op-
erations take place on the server. In the proposed concepts agent-objects have build-in 
functionality that has effect of shifting some services from server location to user 
location. That solution limits client-server communication. That feature distinguishes 
the proposal from client-server based applications like Collaboratus [8].  
Full distribution and minimizing client-s erver communication are needed in work-
flow. Components of document do not have common location. They are able to  
migrate between users according to some policy. When there are many users in  
collaborative group (e.g. in court trials), the problem of too many client-server com-
municates appears. More independence form server allows also for implementing 
assumption that system managing documents should be as transparent to user as it is 
possible.  
Workflow, based on the agent platform, is also implemented by WADE – Work-
flow and Agents Development Environment [9]  software platform. The proposed 
concept differs from that implemented in WADE, because WADE is a data-centric 
approach and MIND is a document-centric one. In MIND architecture, workflow (as a 
XPDL [10] file) is a part of the whole document. Workflow in the form of a document 
may be modified during the process execution. This allows the implementation of

392 M. Godlewska 
complex workflow patterns, i.e. Multiple Instances with a Priori Run-Time Knowl-
edge or Multiple Instances without a Priori Run-time Knowledge presented in [11]. 
3   MIND Architecture 
The main goal of the MIND architecture is to change the static document to mobile 
components, that meet their mission in the distributed agent system. This architecture 
has been proposed with a view of facilitating the collaboration of knowledge workers 
in virtual knowledge-based organizations. In such organizations, a set of particular 
decision taken by workers contributes to the final decision. There are some important 
elements in decision-making process: the structure of organization and knowledge of 
workers passed through the documents. In such a process the external data sources 
(knowledge of workers) appear, therefore the process can be defined as non-
algorithmic. The examples of such processes are court trials, integrative bargaining, 
medical consultations, or crash investigations. 
The MIND architecture involves the creation of a document that contains structure 
of the process and basic documents. The basic documents follow a defined structure 
(migration policy) to move between their authors in the form of mobile agents and 
then, as the interface unit, assist in extracting knowledge from authors . 
The main components of the architecture are:  HDDL (Hub Document Description 
Language) [12] document template, that is defined in XML Schema [2] and the agent 
system for document managing. The document template contains the following com-
ponents: 
− document.xml – basic information about the document in the form of a header and 
a specification of embedded services 
− authors.xml – data about the authors (knowledge workers) 
− templates.xml – a set of basic document templates  
− parts.xml – initial elements of the document 
− path.xml – a workflow definition 
In the architecture some additional services can be defined. They allow for adjust the 
architecture to the particular use case. From the user's perspective, these services can 
be local (installed on local computer), external (accessible from the outside) and em-
bedded (build-in in agent). 
Accurate discussion of the MIND architecture assumptions, as well as a model of 
non-algorithmic decision-making process carried out by knowledge-based organiza-
tions can be found in the earlier paper [13].  
4   Prototype System for Managing Distributed Documents 
The static MIND document is designed in such way that it can be transformed into the 
object form, and then into a set of mobile agents. The mobile agents migrate between 
user’s local workstations in accordance with a defined migration path. Based on the 
MIND architecture the prototype system for remote management of distributed com-
ponents of the document has been implemented.

Agent System for Managing Distributed Mobile Interactive Documents 393 
In the prototype system for managing distributed documents the following tech-
nologies are used. Static documents are implemented in XML language in accordance 
with the HDDL format designed for the MIND architecture. HDDL format has been 
specified in XML Schema. To design workflow process XPDL format [10] is used. 
Server application [14] has been written in Java and JADE platform [15] is used for 
the creation, migration and tracking of agents. XMLBeans [1] is a technology used for 
accessing XML by binding it to Java types, Java Mail platform [16] is used for trans-
ferring  agents via e-mail and Log4j [17] tool is used for creation of event logs.  
The reasons for choosing these technologies in prototype are described in detail in 
previous publication [18]. The MIND architecture is not dependent on the chosen 
technologies and for its implementation different ones may be chosen. To describe the 
structure of documents and workflow XML language was selected. The possibility of 
its transformation and processing with programming languages allows to use its also 
in the future. The advantage of easy archiving of XML documents is particularly 
important in the documents, which will remain valid for many years, such as e.g. 
property rights. 
In order to facilitate the preparation of the documents in HDDL format the follow-
ing tools have been implemented: HDDLEdit [12] for creating and editing  patterns of 
document and STMPEdit [12] for creating and editing of basic documents, that form 
the basic units in the prototype system. 
4.1   The Life Cycle of a Distributed Document in the Agent System 
The system for managing components of the document is designed to implement the 
concept of converting a static form of th e document to the autonomous agents that 
will meet their mission in the system, and then create a final document (cf. Fig.1.). 
Hub
document
Final
document
Container A
(Start activity):
generate a set
of agents
Container Z
(Finish activity):
converting agents
into document
Container B
Container M
Container P
<migrations  
in the system>
<migrations  
in the system>
online
online
 
Fig. 1. The life cycle of a MIND document in the implemented system

394 M. Godlewska 
Agents have built-in migration functionality defined in the MIND policy file. Ac-
cording to the next stage of the document’s life cycle, the agents migrate between the 
authors computers with a basic document. The basic document’s content is processed 
by the respective authors. Organization of the agents population is involved in the 
agent system. The components of the system are run on the users computers. They 
create a platform that enables the functioning of the agents on each workstation, pro-
vides access to memory and enables the use of communication protocols. These pro-
tocols allow agents to exchange messages, and migrate independently on the network. 
If the author's computer is offline in terms of  the agent platform, the system sends the 
agent by e-mail. 
During the completion of the life cycle of the document, the agents reach different 
states, which, in the form of a diagram, is shown in Fig. 2.  
Active
Final
Archived
SentHibernate
Deleted
 
Fig. 2. Agent’s states diagram 
An active state is a state when the agent is run on the agent platform. The agent is 
in a hibernate state in a situation when the user of the current agent’s container 
chooses to stop work and turn off the application. The agent in this state is saved as a 
file (this operation called serialization) on user’s local computer. When the system is 
restarted, the agent can be rerun (transition from hibernate to active state). When the 
next agent’s author is offline in the agent platform, the agent is sent to him by e-mail. 
This additional functionality moves the agent to a sent state. Agent is in this state, as 
long as the agent is stored on the mail server. The agent is received from the e-mail 
server and brought back to the active state after restarting the application. When the 
agent arrives to final activity in the process, it moves to the final state. The agent in 
the final state may be deleted or archived (saved to a file). 
4.2   The Main Modules of the System 
The application server for remote management of distributed document components 
consists of the following modules: agent server module, e-mail module, policy mod-
ule, document module, mediator module and initial module 
Agent Server Module 
The basic element in the agent server module is a JADEServer class. The object of 
this class starts JADE platform. JADE platform provides a set of containers. One of 
them is called a main container. The container is JADE object that allows to run the 
agents. In the main container, three functio nal agents (AMS, DF, RMA) are run. They

Agent System for Managing Distributed Mobile Interactive Documents 395 
control the JADE platform and move the agents. Any other containers must liaise 
with the main container in order to join the JADE platform. 
The cooperation of the various computers in one agent system is possible when all 
containers are connected to the main container.  Users of containers must enter IP 
address of main container to connect to the platform. A successful connection to the 
main container determines that the local system will work online. If connection to the 
main container is not possible, the user must work offline. When the JADE platform 
is started, the agent server module is responsible for managing agents, i.e. for creat-
ing, awakening and deleting agents. 
The agent is built on the basis of the XML document conforming to the MIND archi-
tecture. The agent gets as input arguments the following information: a unique name, 
policy file and basic document ID. Awakening of the agent means running it from a file 
and changing it state from hibernate to active or from sent to active (cf. Fig. 2). 
Functionality of migration enables the agent to transfer in the JADE system. For 
this purpose, some parameters are determined: the name of the agent to be sent, the 
place of its destination after a jump and the basic document to be forwarded. 
E-mail Module 
E-mails are not saved directly in a recipient’s computer, but are stored on mail serv-
ers. Implementation of the e-mail module allows to transfer the serialized agent by  
e-mail when sending it to the JADE server is not possible. This allows the agent to 
reach to assigned recipient even if at the time of dispatch his container is not regis-
tered in the system (i.e. from the viewpoint of the system the recipient is offline). 
The e-mail module uses the Java Mail platform and it is equipped with a set of 
classes responsible for handling e-mail servers, sending and receiving e-mails with a 
specific name. This name allow to distinguish messages with agents from others. A 
main class of module ( MailServer class) implements the operations of sending and 
receiving the agents. Before sending, the agent is serialized to a file. To take advan-
tage of this mechanism, the authors specified on the migration path must have e-mail 
addresses. 
Policy Module and Document Module 
The policy module is separated from the module that manages the other parts of the 
document, because of the very important role in the agents migration. The XPDL file 
defines the process of moving the agents in the system. The policy module provides a 
binding XPDL file to Java objects. For this purpose, XML Beans tool was used to 
generate xpdl.jar file based on XML Schema template for  XPDL language. The 
xpdl.jar library allows for creation of the object representation of XPDL files within 
the system. 
The task of the policy module is mapping a static representation of the policy file 
(path.xml) to the Java reference mechanism. The module opens the policy file (or 
files), interprets its structure and then creates Java objects. 
Completion of work on a basic document in current node triggers the movement of 
this document to another node. In this case, the policy server searches possible transi-
tions. The module creates a collection of locations, which the agent must visit in the 
next step. In this case, the location means a container in the JADE system or e-mail 
address of the next user of the system.

396 M. Godlewska 
The document module allows to load and manage other components of the MIND 
document. In particular, its task is to choose the appropriate basic document in accor-
dance with an activity element from the policy file. 
This module also maps the static XML document to Java objects.  XML Beans tool 
was used to generate XMLHubDoc.jar library based on XML Schema template de-
fined for the MIND architecture. 
The document module is responsible for extracting the basic document from the 
agent and saving it on the local computer of the author assigned to the activity. Then 
the author can perform on that document some actions. After that, the document's 
current version is re-loaded by the agent and moved to another location. When the 
agent reaches the final location, the document is integrated. 
Mediator Module and Initial Module 
Unlike other modules, the mediator does not provide any operation. This service is 
implemented only to provide the communication between other modules and mediate 
in the running of methods. It also allows for easy implementation of subsequent mod-
ules in the evolution of the system. 
The initial module runs all subsystems (modules). The task of the module is to take 
data from the user during the login to the system and booting the system. 
4.3   Prototype Application’s Performance 
The system for managing of components is used to implement the life cycle of the 
MIND documents. The authors defined in the document should be the holders of the 
application, that creates the containers that forming a part of the JADE platform. After 
running the application, dialog box for authors authorization appears. During the login 
operation, the author gives the IP of the main container  (unless the main container is 
created) and the name of the local container. The author may choose to work offline, 
i.e. a work without connection to the main container. After the successful authentica-
tion, the particular modules are run. That l eads to join the container to the JADE plat-
form and runs the possibility of receiving, status changing and sending agents. 
Launching an application as a main container causes running an additional mecha-
nism to monitor the agents and containers on the JADE platform. For this purpose, 
JADE provides a tool in the form of a dialog box. 
In the next step after running, the application converts the MIND document to ob-
jects (this operation is called unmarshalling). The policy and document modules are 
responsible for that. A set of agents is created on the basis of start activities. A unique 
number (consistent with the activity ID) and ID number of the basic document are 
assigned to each agent. 
An agent interface is a simple dialog box with two possible actions: Done and Exit. 
The agent’s GUI may be expanded depending on the system use cases. When the 
author finishes work on a basic document, selects the Done action. The agent then 
reads from the policy file its next activity and moves to a new location. If the con-
tainer of the target activity is present on the platform, the agent is sent by the JADE , 
otherwise the agent is sent by e-mail. In this way, the agent transfers the basic docu-
ment according to the defined workflow. Once the agent reaches a final location, 
Done action deletes the agent or transfers it to the archiving location. In both cases, 
the basic document is saved on the local computer.

Agent System for Managing Distributed Mobile Interactive Documents 397 
If the author chooses the Exit action, it means that he has not finished to work on 
the basic document yet. Then the agent is saved on his local computer as a file and the 
basic document is also saved as a static XML document. When the system is rerun, 
the agent is awaked and the basic documen t is upgraded in accordance with the new 
version from the local computer.  
5   Case Studies of the MIND Architecture 
The MIND architecture was created with a vi ew to facilitating a decision-making in 
complex decision-making processes, in which the electronic circulation of documents 
and extracting knowledge from them is crucial. In order to demonstrate this possibil-
ity of the MIND architecture, two case studies have been implemented. The first of 
these concerns the large-scale problem of ju dicial proceedings. Document in the form 
of complete files can reach an enormous size. The prototype system is not yet ready to 
carry out experiments in this target environment. The experiment took place to verify 
the adequacy of the used notation and the scope of the required functionality. 
In a court trial, there are many documents that are often small and have specified 
structure. The workflow of the files is defined by organizational structure of the 
courts. In this case, there is a possibility to use the agent system for managing the 
electronic files.  
The second case study involved the issue of evaluation of students in a typical  
university environment. This problem allows to test the mechanisms of the MIND 
architecture. In a teaching management system, a person, who receives a document 
template, is a student, and an evaluation card of one subject is a single MIND docu-
ment. In the authors file, there are teachers that leads one subject for a group of  
students. The basic document is transmitted from one teacher to another, according to 
the policy file. The teacher responsible for the subject and the student receive the final 
version of the evaluation card. In the first case the agent is archived, and in the  
second, the agent is removed.  
A119921_04
AUT001
A119921_01
AUT001
A119921_02
AUT002
SPLIT (AND)
A119921_03
AUT000
A119921_05
AUT001
A119921_00
AUT000
TRS0001 TRS0002
TRS0005
(start activity)
(final activity)
(final activity)(archive activity)
 
Fig. 3.  Graphical representation of the policy file for one student and for one subject (basic 
document ID: PAR0001) 
Fig. 3 shows the graph of one migration path of the basic document in the agent 
system. AUT000 is the student’s ID. The student is the author placed in the start ac-
tivity (A119921_00 is a start activity ID). The basic document is copied in the activity 
A119921_02 and the copies are sent to authors: AUT000 and AUT001. There are two 
final activities. The student is the author of first final activity. He receives a copy of 
basic document but agent in not serialized on his computer (the agent is deleted). The 
person responsible for the part of subject is the author of the second final activity. The

398 M. Godlewska 
agent is archived on his computer. This allows to trace the migration path of the 
document by the responsible author. 
The teaching management system in its current form is meeting its objectives, but 
it is not completely user-friendly. To edit the basic documents on the system nodes 
the STMPEdit editor may be used as a local  service. However, it is rather cumber-
some solution. Hence, the are plans to implement tools to improve the system from 
the user perspective. There are possibilities to implement new functionalities in the 
MIND architecture through a mechanism of embedded, local and remote services. 
6   Conclusions 
The prototype server for managing components in the current stage does not imple-
ment all the principles of the MIND architecture. In the next version of the prototype 
new functionality will be added, such as: adding new components, granting of various 
rights of access and views of the basic documents, adding new authors and modifying 
the policy files. A persistent addressing will be implemented to identify author’s lo-
calization by name instead of computer’s IP. This functionality allows the author to 
work on different computers. A control of the agent migration and edition of the 
document will be extended by adding conditions of transitions and checking the time 
of execution of the various tasks. 
The next stage of development of the MIND architecture is to ensure the reliability 
of processing and security of document. Reliability of the process refers to the  
possibility of self-diagnosis of distributed document in a situation where some of its 
component are lost or where some components are changed by unauthorized persons. 
Security of document concerns encryption of its the content and digital signatures. 
Acknowledgments. The author would like to thank the Pomeranian Special Economic 
Zone for the financial support for research on the MIND architecture. 
References 
1. XMLBeans: The Apache XML Project, 
http://xmlbeans.apache.org/sourceAndBinaries/ 
2. XML Schema: W3C Recommendation, http://www.w3.org/XML/Schema 
3. Mella, G., Ferrari, E., Bertino, E., Koglin, Y.: Controlled and Cooperative Updates of 
XML Documents in Byzantine and Failure-Prone Distributed Systems. ACM Transactions 
on Information and System Security 9(4), 421–460 (2006) 
4. Oster, G., Urso, P., Molli, P., Molli, H., Imin e, A.: Optimistic Replication for Massive 
Collaborative Editing, Report of research No. 5719 (2005) 
5. Oster, G., Urso, P., Molli, P., Imine, A.: Proving correctness of transformation functions 
incollaborative editing systems, Report of research No. 5795 (2005) 
6. OrbiTeam Software GmbH & Co. KG, Fraunhofer FIT, BSCW –Basic Support for Coop-
erative Work, Version 4.4, 189 pages (October 2007), http://www.bscw.de/ 
7. Price, D.R.: CVS - Concurrent Versions System (December 3, 2006), 
http://cvs.nongnu.org/

Agent System for Managing Distributed Mobile Interactive Documents 399 
8. Lowry, P.B., Albrecht, C.C., Lee, J.D., Nunamaker, J.F.: Users experiences in collabora-
tive writing using Collaboratus, an Internetbased collaborative work. In: Proceedings of 
the 35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (2002) 
9. Workflows and Agents Development Environment, 
http://jade.tilab.com/wade/index.html 
10. XPDL Schema file, http://www.wfmc.org/standards/docs/ 
TC-1025_schema_10_xpdl.xsd 
11. van der Aalst, W.M.P., ter Hofstede, A.H.M., Kiepuszewski, B., Barros, A.P.: Workflow 
Patterns. Distributed and Parallel Databases 14(1), 5–51 (2003) 
12. Siciarek, J.: Środowisko narz ędziowe do wytwarzania inteligentnych dokumentów  
elektronicznych. Master’s Thesis, Gdansk University of Technology (2008) 
13. Godlewska, M.: Otwarta architektura dokumentu wspieraj ącego podejmowanie decyzji w 
organizacjach opartych na wiedzy. In: DPS 2009, vol. 6, pp. 235–242. PWNT, Gda ńsk 
(2009) 
14. Szczepański, J.: Serwer usług bazowych do zarz ądzania konfiguracj ą inteligentnego  
dokumentu elektronicznego. Master’s Thesis, Gdansk University of Technology (2009) 
15. Java Agent Development Framework, http://jade.tilab.com/ 
16. Java Mail: Sun Developer Network, 
http://java.sun.com/products/javamail/downloads 
17. Apache Log4j: Logging Services, http://logging.apache.org/log4j 
18. Godlewska, M., Wiszniewski, W.: Distributed MIND - a new processing model based on 
mobile interactive documents. In: PPAM 2009. Springer, Heidelberg (2010)

Multiagent Means of Bandwidth Allocation
for Telecommunication Market⋆
Adam Po/suppresslomski
Warsaw University of Technology,
ul. Nowowiejska 15/19 Warsaw, Poland
A.K.Polomski@elka.pw.edu.pl
Abstract. Internet and demand for bandwidth is growing rapidly. New
services are being constantly introduced. Static contracts do not reﬂect
the dynamics of customer’s needs. On the other hand, there is some
amount of valuation coming from safety and bandwidth price guarantee.
In order to satisfy both of those factors, two level allocation process is
introduced. This dual auctioning process allows to make long and short
term bandwidth contracts depending on speciﬁc agent preferences. By
exploiting iterative Vickrey auction mechanism at both allocation levels,
eﬃciency of the process is maintained.
1 Introduction
Internet has been growingr a pidly fort h elast few decades [1], which results in
am ajor increase in the need forb andwidth.T he data transferred over wires be-
comes larger and larger, thus, more bandwidth consuming. On the other hand,
new technologies are introduced,w hich increases the bandwidth supply and low-
ers the market prices.S tatica nd longt e r mcontracts are no longer so attractive
to customers as the dema ndf ord a t at r ansfer mayv aryo ver short periods of
time.T his is why dynamicb andwidth brokeringa p plications [9], [7], [10], [5]
were introduced andb ringa lot of interest.
Auctioning, as the pricingt ool with minimal amount ofr e q uired information
ist h er e a sonable way to address resource allocation problem wheni tc omes
ton etworks.P revious works on diﬀerenta u c tion mechanism describe the fully
dynamic wayo f purchasinga nda llocatingd e sired bandwidth fors hort time
period [3]. Our approach ist o enhance the widely applied staticb a ndwidth
contractingm odelw ith dynamica llocation capabilities ift h e necessity arises.
Thish ybrid wayo f addressingt h eissue carries beneﬁts ofs t andard market model
as well as auction-based one. Ono neh and agents wouldg ain the bandwidth
security ensured by the longt e r mcontract signed with the network provider,
while on the other handt h e“over-the-counter” auction house wouldg ivet h e
possibilityo f leveraging the bandwidth in more eﬃcient way by the wholes ociety,
thus improvingt h esocialw elfare.
⋆ The research was partially supporte d by the Polish Natio nal Budget Funds 2009–
2011 for science under the grant N N516 3757 36.
P. J↪edrzejowicz et al. (Eds.): KES-AMSTA 2010, Part II, LNAI 6071, pp. 400–408, 2010.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Multiagent Means of Bandwidth Allocation for Telecommunication Market 401
2 Theoretical Background
2.1 Fairness Concept
Wheni tc omes to resource allocation procedures the concept off airness isa very
important issue to solve.I st hiss p e ciﬁc resource distribution fairf ora ll agents?
What are the cr iteria which are necessary to match in order too btain the re-
source distribution which might be seen as “fair”. Fairness isa normative issue,
which means it involves judgments.T hat is whyi t ish a r dto claimas p e cial
expertise on this issue and itm ay be considered as a philosophical debate.D if-
ferent agents may haved iﬀerentg oals, so the mechanism which results unequal
resource allocation cannotb ec onsidered unfair without more detailed analysis.
Wec an distinguish three main concepts off airness [11] which focus on diﬀerent
core attributes:
– Equalo pportunity-i n this viewi t is the process that matters,n ott h er e s ult.
Thisc oncept treats the wholed ivision process as a race .A s longa st h e r e
are rules,w hich havet o be obeyed by every participant in the same way, the
division isf air. Of course, some participants might be faster, stronger, more
agilea ndg ain more than the weaker ones.T his iss till considered as fair,
because oft h es a m er ules applied to everyone
– Egalitarian- this view focuses only on the result,n ot the process itself.T his
concept argues, that more equalityo f income isa lways better thenl ess, and
the complete equalityi st h es t a t ewhich shouldb et h eaim.
– Need -n eed is the prioritized attribute here.T oimplementt his view, weh ave
to be ablet o determine/measure theneed of each agent.T hism e a s u r e m ent is
most practicali n small populations,w hile it ish a r dto determinet h eneed in
large groups. Onee s c a p ef romt hisp roblem ist o assume, that everyone’s need
ist h es a m e, but thisr e s ults with the point of viewi dentical to egalitarianism.
2.2 Preference Representation
Preferences [2] represente ither relative ora b solute satisfaction oft h eindivid-
ual, when faced with a choice between diﬀerenta lternatives.I n the context of
multiagentr e source allocation problem, thisc an be seen as diﬀerentp otential
resource distributions or, more precisely, diﬀerentb undles ofr e sources received
by an agent within alternativea llocations.A preference structure represe nts
agent’s preference over the set ofa lternatives.T here are four diﬀerentf a milies
of preference structures:
– Binary- ap a r tition of X into as e tofg ooda llocationsa ndb a dallocations
– Fuzzy- af u z zy relation over X,w hich determines a degree t ow hich one
distribution is preferred over the other one
– Cardinal- consists ofe valuation function called utility u : X→ V ,w here V
ise ither a set of numericalv alues,o r ordered scale ofq u alitative values (e.g.
“good”, “bad”)

402 A. Po/suppresslomski
– Ordinal- this preference structure consists ofb inary relation over alterna-
tives, denoted by.T hisr elation isr eﬂexive, transitivea ndu s u ally (but not
necessary) complete
Since cardinal quantitive preference representation seemed to havet h ehighest
usage levelw heni tc omes to multiagentr e source allocation procedure, this is
where the main focus is put.I n many real-worldd omains, the set ofa lternatives
ise xponentially large, as itr e q uires listinge xponentially many alternatives along
with theiru tility/rankings.T his ist h er e a son why multiagentr e source allocation
requires a language,w hich wouldr e p r e s ent the preference in as u c cinct manner.
2.3 Social Welfare
A typicalo bjectivef orm ultiagentr e source allocation problem ist o ﬁndt h er e-
source distribution [2], which maximizes value ofas p e ciﬁed metric.T hism e t ric
somehow depends on the preferences of individual agents.T he way that prefer-
ences of agents are aggregated deﬁnes the most basicr ules,o nw hich the“society
of agents”willcollaborate whilea llocatingt h er e sources.T here are plentyo fd if-
ferents ocialw elfare notionsa ndm any oft h e mﬁnda p plication in multiagent
resource allocation problem.T he choice shouldb ed ictated by the general aim of
the wholes ociety. Form ost e-commerce applicationst h eaim ist o maximize the
average proﬁt generated byn egotiating agents.U tilitarian socialw elfare should
provide the pretty good assessings ystem in thisc a s e. On the other hand, the
aimm ight be to fairly share the resource,w hich has been earlier cofounded (in
unequal proportions) by all agents. Clearly, optimizing the agents average utility
should notb et h egoal here.T hus, utilitarian socialw elfare is nota p plicable in
thisc a s e. Generally, before the negotiation starts, the agents shouldk now under
what rules, the societyo perates. Otherwise,i tm ayn ot be prepared to agree to
the distribution which in thiss ocietyi ss e en as the most optimal.
2.4 Auctions
Auctionsa r ec ommon andq uite simple wayo fs olvingar e s ource allocation
problem in am ultiagente nvironment [12]. All auction participants can express
how much theyw antt h es p e ciﬁc resource andac e ntralized auctioneer calculates
the resultb a sing on this input data collected from agents.B ecause the auctioneer
isc entralized, thisc an be identiﬁed as a bottleneck oft h ewholes ystem.T here
are some techniques of reducingt h eimpact oft his issue.
Valuation. Like the utilityo fs p e ciﬁc agentc an be represented by the utility
function, wec an express agent’s valuation with the use of valuation function
vi(R). What is importanth e r e, the valuation ise xpressed in ac ommon currency
fora ll agents.T he function vi(R) returnst h ea mount ofm oney agent i is willing
to pay forar e s ource bundle R. Generally agents havea valuation fore very
possibler e source bundle.
In the simplest case, the valuation function is identical to the utility function
ofa n agentf or owningt h a tr e source bundle.T hist a k e splace,w hen the resource

Multiagent Means of Bandwidth Allocation for Telecommunication Market 403
isb eingc onsumed/used andt h a timproves the age nts satisfaction. Thiss ort
of valuation function isc alled a private value function. On the other hand,w e
can haveat otally opposite case,w here the resource cannotb ec onsumed and
therefore does not improve the agent’ss a tisfaction byi tself.T hough the resource
has a resa le value andt h e valuation only depends on the value that others
attribute and will attribute in the future.T his isc alled a common value function.
Most realw orldc a s e showever lies omewhere in between. The resource has both
valuation factors -o nec omes fromt h es a tisfaction gained fromp ossessingt h e
resource andt h eother onef romt h er e s ale value ort h epossibler e source value in
the future.T hisc ombined case of valuation function isc alled a correlated value
function and it is very common in the realw orld with high durablea ndh igh
priced items.
Simple Auctions. When the only thingas ocietyo f agents has t o doi st o
negotiate over price foras p e ciﬁc resource, auction mechanisms come in very
handy. They are fast a ndr e q uire veryl ittlec ommunication between agents.
There isa varietyo fa u c tion mechanisms which diﬀer in rules off unctioning.
– The most common auction mechanism ofa ll ist h eE nglish auction. The
auctioneer raises the price fort h er e source as participating agents propose
higher bids. Once no one is willingt o pay any higher price the participant
with the highest bid winst h er e source.T hiss ort ofa u c tion can also have
its reservation price below which the seller is not willingt o get rid oft h e
resource.T he dominants t r a t e gyi st o bid the curre ntp rice + some small
amountu ntil the auction is won ort h e valuation price is reached.I ft h e
auction isc ommon orc orrelated value it veryo ften suﬀers fromt h ewinners
curse.I fa n agenth a swon itm e ansh ep aidm ore than anyonee lse was willing
to pay. Att h a tpoint its valuation price goes down.
– First price sealed bid isa very similar mechanism.A l lparticipantp lace their
bets in sealed envelopes,w hich are later analyzed by an auctioneer,w ho
picks the highest bid,w hich winst h er e source.T hiss ort ofa u c tion has no
dominants t r a t e gy, unless an agentc an spyo no ther participants bids and
use that knowledge to prepare its own bid.
– In Dutch auction the seller constantly lowers the price until any participant
places its bida nd winst h er e source.A nalysiss hows, that itd oes noth ave
any dominants t r a t e gy. However, thism e c h anism has one veryi mportant
propertyo fb eingr e al-time eﬃcient.T he auction closes quickly (right after
the ﬁrst bida r rives) andt h ea u c tioneer can even speed itu pb y reducingt h e
price in aq uicker manner.
– Vicrey auction isas e condp rice sealed auction. All agents place theirb ids
and the agent with the higher one winst h er e source.T he amounth eh a sto
pay fort h er e source ise q u al to the secondh ighest bidp laced.T he dominant
strategy here ist o simply bid ones true valuation. Fore xample,i f youa r e
willingt o buy ani tem for the price v and youb id less than v,y our isk the
possibility that some other agent will bid w<v and win the auction, even
though youc ouldh ave won it. On the other handb idding v’>v brings the
risk, that some other agent will bid w( where v′>w>v )w hich will cause

404 A. Po/suppresslomski
buyingt h er e source for the price higher thany our valuation. Vicrey auctions
eliminate the need ofs t r a t e gizinga nd that makes them very attractive in
terms ofe ﬃ ciency.
3M o d e l
In order to get most oft h ecorrelated, rather thano n l yprivate agent’s valuation
forb andwidth andt h e r e fore improvingt h e overall socialw elfare metric, two
level bandwidth allocation model has beeni ntroduced.L o wer level generates
standard,l o ngt e r mcontracts providingb andwidth safety. Upper level acts as
“oﬀ the counter” market.A n y agentc an resell any unwanted bandwidth bits
purchased earlier fora longt e r mallocation. Upper level contracts are made
fora very short time periods, thus itr eﬂects the dynamics of agent’sc h anging
requirements.
3.1 Resource Representation
The modell everages discrete bandwidth bits with the granularityo f ba as the
main resource which undergoes the whole valuation, auctioninga nda llocation
process.A st h ea llocation is notp e r formed in the commutativem anner and
bandwidth is notg u a r anteed in packet networks (in contrary toL A Nbandwidth
allocation models [4]), it ist r e a t e donly as an upper bandwidth limita llocated
by an agent.T he auctioned bandwidth isa llocated to the winning agentf ora
speciﬁc period oft ime ts in case ofs hort term allocations.T he same resource
representation modeli sa p plied,w heni tc omes tol o ngt e r mcontracts valid
for longer time period tl ≫ts.S i nce wea r ed e aling with a two level market,
every agenth a stwo sets ofa llocated resources.F ore very agent ai there isa
short term allocation ofb andwidth si fort ime period ts.S hort term allocation
isa n“ o ver the c ounter” market foru nused resources comingf rom longt e r m
contracts.A gent ai has ano ption to resell the temporarily unwanted bandwidth
part gi = k∗ ba ≤ li,k ∈ Z,w here li is longt e r mcontracted bandwidth.
Combininga ll the allocation market values together wec an calculate the eﬀective
bandwidth allocation foras p e ciﬁc time slot:
bi = si +( li− gi)
The resource bundles are notc omparableb e tween diﬀerenta llocation slots, as
the bandwidth cannotb eg u a r anteed to the winning agent. On the other hand,
they are comparable within t h es a m eallocation slot.F irst ofa ll, it isa lwaysm ore
relevantt o possess larger bandwidth limit.T he problem may arise ift wo orm ore
agents compete forab a ndwidth on as ingle network link (as in Fig.1 ) ,which has
insuﬃcientt h roughput to fulﬁll all requests, thus∑n
i=1 bi >T .I n thisc a s e, the
allocated bandwidth is treated as the priorityw eight foras ingle agent.T he real
bandwidth pi designated for the useof agent ai over theinsuﬃcientt h roughput T

Multiagent Means of Bandwidth Allocation for Telecommunication Market 405
Fig. 1. Bottleneck competition
network link with n competing agents is weighted usingt h enormalized eﬀective
bandwidth allocation in the given time slot.
pi = T bi
n∑
j=1
bj
This assures that despite of current network state, b1 >b 2 will alwaysg u a r antee
better eﬃciencyi n data transmission within the same network route.
3.2 Valuation and Social Welfare
The basic assumption is, that every agent isa s sociated with some utility function
us(R), that expresses its utility amountg iven the resource set R isa llocated and
designated for that agent’sd isposition duringt h etime period ts.F ort h every same
agent, there isa lso diﬀerentu tility function ul(R), which represents agents utility
amountf roma longt e r m(tl) allocation oft h er e source set R.V aluation ise q u al
to the utility amountf ors hort term contracts.L o ngt e r mcontracts on the other
hand, provide some additional element ofc ommon valuation generated by resale
possibility. In thisc a s evaluation isac orrelated value ofb oth factors.J ust as in
case ofu tility,vs ist h es hort term and vl -l o ngt e r mallocation valuation function.
Socialw elfare fort h ec ommunityo fb andwidth auctioning agents isb eing
calculated the utilitarianw ay.Given that every agent’s wealth needs to be equally
takeni nto account while determiningt h ewealth oft h ewholec ommunity, this
isar e a sonablec hoice, as itp rovides goodm e t rics forb oth average and overall
welfare.I n comparison to standard,o ne level bandwidth allocation market, the
two level model has some additional features.L et r1 to rg be a fu ll resource
set availablef ora llocation. By sortinga ll valuations decreasingly, the eﬀective
valuationsc an be determined forp e r formingb andwidth allocations.I n case of
simple (one level) market, as sho w ni nF ig. 2, the utilitarian socialw elfare sw1
can be calculated straight forward.
sw1 =
g∑
j=1
vsj

406 A. Po/suppresslomski
Fig. 2. Simple market allocation process
Fig. 3. Two level market allocation process
Fort wo level market allocation, as shown in Fig.3 , the socialw elfare sw2 is
ac ombination oft wo factors:l o ngt e r mands hort term allocation valuations.
Short term allocation resource set iss m aller, as nota ll bandwidth needs to be
resold on the second level market (g ≥ h), thus smaller wealth comingf rom
this level. On the other hand, additionalv alue comes fromt h ef a c tof longt e r m
bandwidth guarantee.
sw2 =
g∑
j=1
vlj +
h∑
k=1
vsk
Comparingt h e s etwo bandwidth auctioning market approaches, two level model
improves the overall socialw elfare,i f longt e r mcontracts don ot interfere with
too many highly valuated second level allocations.
sw1− sw2 =
g∑
j=h
vsj−
g∑
k=1
vlk < 0( 1 )
g∑
j=h
vsj <
g∑
k=1
vlk (2)
Accordingt o( 2) beneﬁts comingf rom longt e r mb andwidth guarantee should
surpass the value of the prevented short term transactions.T hisc ondition isa
goodb a s eform a kinga longt e r mallocation decision in the ﬁrst place in order
to assure the socialw elfare gain.

Multiagent Means of Bandwidth Allocation for Telecommunication Market 407
Fig. 4. Iterative Vickrey auction mechanism
3.3 Auction Mechanism
Everyo ft h etwo market levelsa u c tion mechanism exploits Vickrey auction con-
cept.T his way af ewv eryi mportant features are maintained.A gents are forced
to submitt h eirt r u eb andwidth valuations, since there is no potential beneﬁt
comingf romm anipulations.A uction runs are perf ormed quickly. Ast h e r eis
only oneb iddingc yclep e r level, ita lso minimizes the am ount of information
gathered from the participating agents.
As agents place theirb ids fort h ewholes e tofa u c tioned resources at onet ime,
Vickrey mechanism isa p plied iteratively as presented in Fig. 4.F irst valuation
v1 from the decreasingly sorted valuation set isa s sociated with the topr e source
bit r1.A gentb idding v1 winst h er e source for the price of v2.A fter removingt h e
associated pairf romt h ewholec ycle isp e r formed again, until nomore bandwidth
bits are left to allocate.
k∑
i=1
g∑
j=h
vsji
k∗ (g− h) (3)
In order to maintain the condition (2) satisﬁed, the valuation restriction isa p-
plied at the lower market level. By calculatingt h em e an bandwidth bit valua-
tion oft h eallocations which were prevented byi ntroducingt wo level allocation
procedure,w ec an deﬁneam inimum valuation thresholdf ort h elower level al-
locations, as in (3). This is ofc ourse only prediction model basing on historyo f
previous valuationsf or k upper level allocations.A n yresource bits that did not
get allocated at this level will be placed in every upper level auction duringt his
period.
4 Concluding Remarks
Some customers require the market to reﬂect theird ynamicaly changingd e m ands
and value that abovea ny form ofp rice safety provided byl o ngt e r mcontracts. On

408 A. Po/suppresslomski
the other hand, diﬀerentc u s tomer class may havet h eopposite preferences.T he
described two level bandwidth allocation model provides meansf ors a tifyingb oth
groups.T hisf e a t u r em a k e sitp otentially less intrusive, thus easier toi mplement
in ar e aln etwork environment.
Some issues still remain open andr e q uire addressing.T he modeln eeds ver-
iﬁcation ands houldb et e s t e din an experimentaln etwork.P ricingm e c h anism
which wouldr eﬂect the true utility comingf roma llocated bandwidth bits isa n
area ofp ossiblef u r t h e rr e s e a r c h.T he eﬀectiveb andwidth [8] might be a mean
to measure thisu tility. Agents’o ﬀers andt h eire xchange mechanism need to be
formalized.T he M3 model[ 6 ]might be utilised to serve as a data representation
andc ommunication protocol for the purpose ofa u c tions.
References
1. Burstein, D.: Bandwidth: Cogent pricing, juniper conﬁrms normal
bandwidth demand growth, http://www.informatica.si/PDF/30-1/01_
Chevaleyre-Issues%20in%20Multiagent%20Resource%20Allocation.pdf
2. Chevaleyre, Y., Dunne, P.E., Endriss, U., Lang, J., Lemaˆ ıtre, M., Maudet, N.,
Padget, J.A., Phelps, S., Rodr´ıguez-Aguilar, J.A., Sousa, P.: Issues in multiagent
resource allocation. Informatica (Slovenia) 30(1), 3–31 (2006)
3. Courcoubetis, C., Dramitinos, M.P., Stamoulis, G.D.: An auction mechanism for
bandwidth allocation over paths. In: 17th International Teletraﬃc Congress, pp.
1163–1174 (2001)
4. Hasselrot, T.: Fair bandwidth allocation in internet access gateways - using agent-
based electronic markets. Tech. rep., SICS (2003)
5. Jiaolong, W., Chi, Z.: Uniform-price auction for bandwidth allocation in the inter-
net. Journal of Electronics (China) 19(4), 408–414 (2007)
6. Kacprzak, P., Kaleta, M., Palka, P., Smolira, K., Toczylowski, E., Traczyk, T.: Ap-
plication of open multi-commodity market data model on the communication band-
width market. Journal of Telecommunications and Information Technology 4(1),
45–50 (2007)
7. Karbhari, P., Zegura, E.W., Ammar, M.H.: Multipoint-to-point session fairness in
the internet. In: INFOCOM (2003)
8. Kelly, F.P.: Notes on eﬀective bandwidths. In: Stochastic Networks: Theory and
Applications, pp. 141–168. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1996)
9. Li, C.F., Li, J.S.: Fair allocation using a fast smart market auction. European
Journal of Operational Research 172(1), 352–365 (2006)
10. Manvi, S.S., Venkataram, P.: An agent based adaptive bandwidth allocation scheme
for multimedia applications. Journal of Systems and Software 75(3), 305–318 (2005)
11. Schenk, R.: What is fair? (1997),
http://ingrimayne.com/econ/resouceProblems/Fairness.html
12. Vidal, J.M.: Fundamentals of Multiagent Systems: Using NetLogo Models. Unpub-
lished (2006), http://www.multiagent.com/fmas

Author Index
Abrahams, Brooke I-102
Adanhounm`e, Villevo II-92
Ad´edjouma, S`emiyou A. II-92
Ahmad, Mohd Sharifuddin I-203
Ahmed, Moamin I-203
Babczy´nski, Tomasz I-430
Baik, Sung Wook II-100
Bala, Jerzy II-100
Bandar, Zuhair II-82
Barbucha, Dariusz II-180
Bednarska, Urszula II-150
Bentahar, Jamal II-11
Bergeret, Michael I-82
Bojic, Iva II-62
Bombini, Grazia I-273
Borzymek, Piotr I-122
Brzykcy, Gra˙zyna I-183
Budzynska, Katarzyna I-315
B¨uning, Hans Kleine I-223, I-233
ˇCapkoviˇc, Frantiˇsek I-193
Chang, Woosuck I-361
Chesani, Federico I-1, I-112
Chmielewski, Mariusz I-173
Corrˆea, Underl´ea I-243
Crockett, Keeley II-82
Czarnecki, Adam II-330
Czarnowski, Ireneusz II-130
Czubak, Adam II-72
Dagba, Th´eophile K. II-92
Danek, Agnieszka I-22
Di Bitonto, Pierpaolo I-32
Di Mauro, Nicola I-273
Drapa/suppressla, Jaros/suppresslaw I-351
Drozdz, Katarzyna II-140
Dssouli, Rachida II-11
Dudek, Marek II-282
Dzie´nkowski, Bart/suppresslomiej J´ozef II-110
Eberling, Markus I-223, I-233
El-Menshawy, Mohamed II-11
Esmaeili, Ahmad I-92
Esposito, Floriana I-273
Ferilli, Stefano I-273
Fuks, Konrad II-312
Garbacz, Pawel I-315
Gawro´nski, Przemys/suppresslaw II-220
Gelenbe, Erol II-42
Ghedira, Khaled II-302
Godlewska, Magdalena II-390
Golinska, Paulina II-292, II-321
Goua¨ıch, Abdelkader I-82, I-253
Graczyk, Magdalena I-420
Grobelny, Piotr I-132
Gunasekera, Kutila I-62
Hadouaj, Sameh I-283
Ha, Sung Ho II-1
Henane, Islem I-283
H¨oning, Nicolas II-252
H¨ubner, Jomi I-243
Jakie/suppressla, Jacek II-32
Jaszczyk, Piotr II-370
J¸edrzejowicz, Joanna II-200
J ↪edrzejowicz, Piotr II-130,
II-160, II-200
Jezic, Gordan I-213
J´ozefowska, Joanna I-6
Jung, Jason J. I-401
Jurasovic, Kresimir I-213
Kacprzak, Magdalena I-315
Kalinowski, Piotr I-72
Kaminski, Bogumil I-263
Katarzyniak, Rados/suppresslaw I-72
Kawa, Arkadiusz II-292, II-312
Kein¨anen, Helena I-331
Kim, Chonggun I-361, I-401
Kim, Geumdeok I-361
Kim, Sung Gook II-100
Klimarczyk, Grzegorz II-321
Kodia, Zahra II-302
Kolasa, Tomasz II-360
Kopacz, Zygmunt II-321
Kotowski, Romuald II-120

410 Author Index
Kotulski, Leszek I-381
Kowalski, Pawe/suppressl II-380
Krishnaswamy, Shonali I-62
Kr´ol, Dariusz II-360, II-370, II-380
Kruczkiewicz, Zoﬁa I-430
Kr¨uger, Hans-Peter II-242
Ku/suppresslakowski, Konrad I-325, II-52
Ku/suppresslakowski, Krzysztof II-220
Kulicki, Piotr I-315
Kusek, Mario I-213, II-62
Kuwabara, Kazuhiro I-371
Kwasnicka, Halina II-140, II-190
Lasota, Tadeusz I-420
Latek, Maciej I-263
Laterza, Maria I-32
Lechniak, Marek I-315
Lipi´nski, Bartosz I-411
Litwin, Pawe/suppresslI I - 3 2
Loke, Seng Wai I-62
Maag, Christian II-242
Mahdi, Ghulam I-253
Malinowski, Janusz II-229
Maries, Iulia I-305
Mark, Christian II-242
M¸aka, Wojciech II-120
Markowska-Kaczmar, Urszula II-110
Masadynski, Micha/suppressl II-321
Mello, Paola I-1, I-112
Mianowska, Bernadetta I-163
Michel, Fabien I-253
Miyamoto, Shohei I-371
Montali, Marco I-1, I-112
Montez, Carlos I-243
Mozayani, Nasser I-92
Nguyen, Linh Anh I-152
Nguyen, Ngoc Thanh I-163
Ni, Chen I-361
Olech, Marcin II-32
Oliveira, Eug´enio I-22, I-42
Or/suppresslowski, Cezary II-330, II-340, II-351
O’Shea, James II-82
Pawlewski, Pawe/suppressl II-282
Pecatte, Jean-Marie I-341
Penar, Wojciech I-430
Piech, Henryk II-150
Podobnik, Vedran II-62
Po/suppresslomski, Adam II-400
Ragged, Nasr I-283
Rammal, Ali I-341
Ratajczak-Ropel, Ewa II-210
Rejer, Izabela I-52
Rembelski, Pawel I-315
Rocha, Ana Paula I-22, I-42
Roselli, Teresa I-32
Rossano, Veronica I-32
Rybacki, Rafa/suppressl II-340
Rykowski, Jarogniew II-22
Saeed, Khalid II-220
Said, Lamjed Ben I-283, II-302
Scarlat, Emil I-305
S¸edziwy, Adam I-381
Schmidt, Thomas I-233
Schut, Martijn C. II-252
Seredynski, Michal II-120
Sharpanskykh, Alexei II-262
Shimode, Yuya I-371
Sikora, Wieslawa II-229
Singer, Nicolas I-341
Sitek, Tomasz II-340
Skowron, Andrzej I-12
Sobecki, Janusz I-351
Stanek, Michal II-190
Sydow, Marcin I-122
Sza/suppresslas, Andrzej I-152
Szupiluk, Ryszard II-272
Tarapata, Zbigniew I-293
Tarnawski, Tomasz I-411
Telec, Zbigniew I-420
Torroni, Paolo I-1, I-112
Trawi´nski, Bogdan I-420
Trouilhet, Sylvie I-341
Trypuz, Robert I-315
Urbano, Joana I-22, I-42
Vasques, Francisco I-243
Velan, Kumaara II-42
W ↪as, Jaros/suppresslaw I-325
Wierzbowska, Izabela II-160
Wilkos, Krzysztof I-173

Author Index 411
Wilkos, Marcin I-173
Wilkosz, Kazimierz I-430
Wojewnik, Piotr II-272
Wojtanowski, Jakub II-72
Woo, Kyeong Deok II-100
Wu, Mary I-401
Yusoﬀ, Mohd Zaliman M. I-203
Z ↪abkowski, Tomasz II-272
Zakrzewska, Danuta I-391
Zargayouna, Mahdi II-170
Zaslavsky, Arkady I-62
˙Zatuchin, Dmitrij I-351
Zatwarnicki, Krzysztof I-142
Zeddini, Besma II-170
Zeleznikow, John I-102
Zi´o/suppresslkowski, Artur II-351
