Agent-based Simulation of Retail
Electricity Markets: Bilateral Trading Players
Fernando Lopes, Hugo Algarvio
LNEG−National Research Institute
Estrada do Pac ¸o do Lumiar, 22
1649-038 Lisbon, Portugal
{fernando.lopes, hugo.algarvio }@lneg.pt
Helder Coelho
University of Lisbon
Bloco C6, Piso 3, Campo Grande
1749-016 Lisbon, Portugal
hcoelho@di.fc.ul.pt
Abstract—The electricity industry throughout the world,
which has long been dominated by vertically integrated utilities,
has experienced major changes. Deregulation, unbundling,
wholesale and retail wheeling, and real-time pricing were
abstract concepts a few years ago. Today market forces drive
the price of electricity and reduce the net cost through
increased competition. As power markets continue to evolve,
there is a growing need for advanced modeling approaches.
Accordingly, this article looks at using software agents to
help manage the complexity of electricity markets, particularly
retail markets. The article focuses on bilateral trading and
describes some important features of an agent-based system
for bilateral contracting. Special attention is devoted to the
characteristics and negotiation behaviour of Buyer and Seller
agents.
Keywords-Bilateral contracting; deregulated electricity mar-
kets; software agents; two-party negotiation; trading strategies.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Traditional vertically integrated power utilities around the
world have evolved from monopoly structures to open mar-
kets. Electric utility systems were unbundled and replaced
with a number of separate business entities dealing with the
generation, transmission, and distribution of electric power.
The deregulation process has led to the establishment of
a wholesale market for electricity generation, where com-
peting generators offer their electricity output to retailers,
and a retail market for electricity retailing, where end-use
customers choose their supplier from competing electricity
retailers.
Two major market models have been considered [2]:
electricity pools and bilateral transactions. A pool, or market
exchange, involves basically a speciﬁc form of auction,
where participants send bids to sell and buy electricity, for
a certain period of time, to a market operator, who in turn
analyzes the bids and calculates a market price.
This work was performed under the project MAN-REM: Multi-agent
Negotiation and Risk Management in Electricity Markets (FCOMP-01-
0124-FEDER-020397), and supported by both FEDER and National funds
through the program “COMPETE −Programa Operacional Tem ´atico Fac-
tores de Competividade”.
Bilateral contracts are negotiable agreements on delivery
and receipt of power between two traders. These contracts
usually involve the sale of large amounts of power (hundreds
or thousands of megawatts) over long periods of time
(several months to years). Their terms and conditions are
set independent of a market operator—although this operator
should verify that sufﬁcient transmission capacity exists to
complete the transactions and maintain transmission secu-
rity. Market participants often enter into bilateral contracts
to hedge against pool price volatility.
As power markets continue to evolve, there is a growing
need for advanced modeling approaches that simulate how
market participants may act and react to the changing
ﬁnancial and regulatory environments in which they operate.
An agent-based modeling and simulation approach presents
itself as a promising approach to model deregulated electric-
ity markets (EMs). Software agents can be designed to act in
open and distributed environments, with incomplete and un-
certain information, and may efﬁciently manage cooperative
and competitive interactions with other agents.
This work looks at using software agents to help manage
the complexity of EMs, notably retail markets. This paper
focuses on bilateral trading and describes some important
features of an agent-based system for bilateral contracting. In
particular, special attention is devoted to the characteristics
and negotiation behaviour of Buyer and Seller agents. They
are equipped with a generic model of individual behavior
and a negotiation framework that handles two-party and
multi-issue negotiation. Also, they interact according to
the rules of an alternating offers protocol and can pursue
strategies motivated by rules-of-thumb distilled from good
behavioral practice in real-life negotiations.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
Section II describes two prominent agent-based tools for
electricity markets: SEPIA [1] and EMCAS [3]. Section III
presents some key features of an agent-based system for
bilateral contracting in retail electricity markets, focusing
on Buyer and Seller agents. Finally, section IV presents
concluding remarks and indicates future avenues of research.
2013 24th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications
1529-4188/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/DEXA.2013.50
189
2013 24th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications
1529-4188/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/DEXA.2013.50
189
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

II. S IMULA TORS FOR ELECTRICITY MARKETS
Agent-based simulation has been a popular technique to
model and analyze deregulated electricity markets over the
past decade. This section describes the key features of two
prominent agent-based tools for electricity markets.
SEPIA: The Simulator for the Electric Power Industry
Agents was developed by the Honeywell Technology Center
and the University of Minnesota [1]. SEPIA models a power
system as a set of zones—that is, electrical models made
up of single electrical nodes—interconnected by tie-lines.
Generators within a zone are owned by generator operating
companies (GenCos). A speciﬁc generator, the “generator of
last resort” (GLR), is automatically assigned to each zone.
The generating capacity of GLR is inﬁnite, but its selling
price is much higher than that of the other generators. Loads
are owned by consumer operating companies (ConCos),
which negotiate prices and purchase energy for the loads
from the GenCos. The transmission system consists of tie-
lines between zones.
The major components of SEPIA include a number of
domain-speciﬁc agents, a generic simulation engine, and a
graphical user interface. The agents represent generators,
loads, GenCos, ConCos, and the transmission system opera-
tor. They are constructed as layered components, with each
layer adding a speciﬁc functionality. Worthy of mention is
a learning module incorporating two algorithms: a variation
of Q-learning and genetic classiﬁer systems. The general
discrete-event simulation engine controls SEPIA simulations
and mediates all inter-agent communication. The graphical
user interface handles all interactions between the user
and the simulations and incorporates four sub-functions:
scenario editing, simulation control, property editing, and
report management.
SEPIA implements a bilateral contracts market for elec-
tricity. Generation company agents control one or more
generators—they attempt to maximize proﬁt by establishing
attractive bilateral contracts. Consumer company agents are
responsible for purchasing energy for each of their indi-
vidual loads—they try to purchase power for the lowest
possible price. Periodically, each consumer company agent
determines its hourly power need proﬁle (by aggregating
the needs of each of its loads) and broadcasts a “request for
quotes” (RFQ) to all generation company agents, regardless
of zone. The RFQ contains the power needs for every hour
for the next week and will be valid for a short time period.
Next, generation companies determine whether to submit
a quote for some or all of the power requested by the
RFQ. The decision to respond to the RFQ and to determine
the price to charge for the energy involves the generation
cost function and the megawatt capacities for each speciﬁc
generator. Once the validity of the RFQ has expired, the
consumer company agent evaluates all the quotes it has
received and accepts one, many, or none of them.
All contracts that require power to be transmitted across
zone boundaries are checked against an available trans-
mission capability (A TC), which is maintained by the
transmission network operator agent. Transactions violating
transmission limits are not allowed. Generation company
agents take on the risk and responsibility of delivering all
energy they quoted to consumer agents, meaning that before
submitting a quote they need to check the public A TC
table and reserve transmission rights as soon as a quote is
accepted. The GLR for each zone provides slack, though
high-priced, energy so that no load will ever go with any
energy requirement left unmet.
SEPIA is intended to allow users to conduct computa-
tional experiments regarding the behavior of power systems
under a variety of physical and market conditions. The
target platform is a microcomputer running a Microsoft
Windows operating system. The speciﬁc CPU and memory
requirements depend on the size and complexity of the
computational experiment being conducted. The develop-
ment and update of agents require the use of a high-level
programming language such as C++, Java, or VisualBasic.
EMCAS: The Electricity Market Complex Adaptive Sys-
tem, developed by the Argonne National Laboratory, is one
of the most popular electricity market simulators [3]. Gener-
ation companies (GenCos) represent the business units that
own generators—they may own a single plant (and operate
like an independent power producer) or multiple plants (and
be part of a larger corporate parent that provides other prod-
ucts in the electricity market). Demand company (DemCos)
represent the business units that sell electricity to consumers,
which include residential, commercial, industrial, and other
electricity consumers. The physical transmission system is
represented by a set of nodes and links that represent buses
and lines, respectively. Its operation is governed by decisions
made by both the transmission company (TransCo) that owns
the facilities and an independent system operator (ISO).
Distribution companies (DistCos) own and operate the lower
voltage distribution system. They provide distribution ser-
vices to GenCos and DemCos but do not engage in strategic
business practices.
The modeling framework can be described in terms of
three main components: agents, interaction layers, and plan-
ning periods. The agents are used to capture the heterogene-
ity of deregulated electricity markets and include (GenCos),
(DemCos), (TransCos), (DistCos), (ISOs), consumers, and
regulators. They can establish their own objectives, apply
their own decision rules, and learn and adapt based on past
performance and changing conditions. In particular, they
can learn about the market and the actions of other agents
using two forms of learning: observation-based learning
and exploration-based learning. Their risk preference can
be broadly classiﬁed into risk-averse, risk-neutral, and risk-
seeking.
190
190
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

The interaction layers provide the environment in which
the agents reside and interact with each other. These layers
include a physical layer (representing the system elements
that are involved in the physical generation, transmission,
distribution, and consumption of electricity), several busi-
ness layers (accounting for pool markets, bilateral contracts
markets, ancillary services markets, and the ownership of
the transmission and distribution systems as well as the fees
charged by these companies for the use of their facilities),
and a regulatory layer (representing the regulatory side of the
electricity market that establishes market rules and monitors
market performance). The planning periods correspond to
the different time horizons for which the agents make
decisions regarding their participation in the market. Six
distinct time scales or decision levels are considered, namely
hourly dispatch, and day-ahead, week-ahead, month-ahead,
year-ahead, and multi-year planning.
As mentioned above, EMCAS simulates three types of
markets: pools, bilateral contracts, and ancillary services.
In particular, bilateral contracts are agreements between
GenCos and DemCos for the purchase and sale of electricity.
The negotiation process is similar to the process outlined
above for SEPIA, though there are important differences. A
description of this process follows.
DemCos formulate requests for proposals (RFPs) for
capacity and energy on the basis of the anticipated needs
of their customers and their risk tolerance for exposure to
pool market price volatility. RFPs can be of two distinct
types: energy deliveries that are constant over all hours
of the contract term and energy deliveries that vary over
time. Each DemCo’s request is based on projections of
its customers’ future energy requirements and is subject
to uncertainty—this uncertainty stems from such factors as
weather forecast errors, inaccurate projections of the type
and number of future customers, unpredictable variability in
customers’ electricity consumption patterns, and anticipated
future prices of short-term markets.
GenCos analyze RFPs, formulate bid responses, and send
them to DemCos. The responses include prices for all or
some portions of the requested capacities and energies. They
are based largely on projected market prices—projections
are a function of historical information that acts as a
collection of past experiences. Each GenCo weighs the
costs and beneﬁts (i.e., net proﬁts) of entering into bilateral
contracts versus selling its energy production on the pool
and ancillary services markets. Anticipated net proﬁts are
based on projected prices in each of the markets and the
costs associated with power production. Production costs are
a function of fuel costs, variable operating and maintenance
costs, heat rate curves (represented as fuel consumption for
blocks of production), and unit start-up and shutdown costs.
In addition to net proﬁts, each GenCo also considers other
factors into its ﬁnal pricing response to an RFP , such as risk
of rejection.
DemCos evaluate the responses that they receive and
either accept or reject the offers. They accept offers (if any)
that maximize corporate utility. The decision is based on the
offers received and projected market prices. At this stage
of the negotiation process, both DemCos and GenCos can
revise their marketing strategies and initiate a new round
of RFPs—dynamic strategy revision is based on lessons
learned from previous bid rounds and newly forged bilateral
agreements among market players. The user can control the
number of bidding rounds.
Agents’ behavior is largely a function of their risk pref-
erence, modeled by using a von Neumann-Morgenstern
expected multi-objective utility function. For instance, a
GenCo that is risk-averse may choose to forgo some po-
tential proﬁts on the pool market and sell its capability and
production via bilateral agreements with a guaranteed stream
of income. Also, a DemCo that has a low tolerance for price
variability may decide to serve most or all of its projected
loads via long-term ﬁrm contracts. On the other hand, a
purely proﬁt-maximizing GenCo may choose to enter solely
into pool and ancillary services markets despite high market
price volatility if it foresees that it can potentially make more
money.
EMCAS is written in Java and uses extensible markup
language (XML) for data storage. Java directly supports
object-oriented implementation and complex multithreading.
XML is an open, highly portable, and worldwide standard,
allowing EMCAS to be easily interconnected with external
data sources, models, and tools.
III. B ILA TERAL CONTRACTING IN A MULTI -AGENT
RETAIL MARKET
An ongoing study is looking at using software agents with
negotiation competence to help manage the complexity of
electricity markets, particularly retail markets, towards en-
suring long-term capacity sustainability. This paper focuses
on bilateral contracts, either physical or ﬁnancial, between
a buyer and a seller pair. Speciﬁcally, this section describes
some key features of an agent-based system for bilateral
contracting in a retail electricity market.
The major components of the system include a graphical
user interface, a simulation engine, and a number of domain-
speciﬁc agents. The graphical user interface allows users to
set agent-speciﬁc parameters, specify and monitor negotia-
tion simulations, gather simulation reports, and perform a
variety of administrative tasks such as saving simulations
(see Figure 1). The simulation engine does not rely on
any domain-speciﬁc knowledge and controls all negotiation
simulations. The agents are computer systems capable of
ﬂexible, autonomous action and able to communicate, when
appropriate, with other agents to meet their design objec-
tives. They are currently being developed using the JA V A
programming language and the JADE platform.
191
191
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. Bilateral contracting of electricity: offer formulation and graph of negotiation dynamics.
In particular, we are working on the following types of
agents:
• Retailer or Supplier agents : represent the business units
that sell electricity to consumers; they buy energy from
a wholesale market and sell energy to a retail market;
• Customer or Consumer agents : include residential,
commercial, industrial, and other electricity consumers;
• Trader agents: promote liberalization and competition,
and simplify dealings between sellers and buyers;
• Market agents : analyze the technical feasibility of all
negotiated contracts; also, they maintain system se-
curity, administer transmission tariffs, and coordinate
maintenance scheduling.
The agents are equipped with a generic model of individ-
ual behavior (see also [4], [5] and [8]). The model accounts
for the following key features:
• A set of beliefs representing information about the
agent itself, other existing agents, and the market;
• A set of goals representing world states to be achieved;
• A library of plan templates representing simple proce-
dures for achieving goals;
• A set of plans for execution, either immediately or
in the near future; each plan is a collection of plan
templates structured into a hierarchical and temporally
constrained And-tree; the header of each instantiated
plan template is referred to as intention.
Buyer and Seller agents are also equipped with a ne-
gotiation framework that handles two-party and multi-issue
negotiation (see also [7], [8], [9], [10] and [6]). Negotiation
proceeds through several distinct stages or phases, namely
a pre-negotiation phase, an actual negotiation phase, and
a post-negotiation phase. Pre-negotiation is the process of
preparing and planning for negotiation and involves mainly
the prioritization of the issues at stake, the deﬁnition of limits
and targets, and the speciﬁcation of preferences to rate and
compare incoming offers and counter-offers.
Actual negotiation is the process of moving toward agree-
ment and typically involves an iterative exchange of offers
and counter-offers. Two agents interact and trade with one
another according to the rules of an alternating offers
protocol [11]. The negotiation process starts with an agent
ai submitting a proposal p1
i→j to aj in period t =1 . The
other agent aj receives p1
i→j and can either accept the offer,
reject it and opt out of the negotiation, or reject it and
continue bargaining. In the ﬁrst two cases the negotiation
ends. Speciﬁcally, if p1
i→j is accepted, negotiation ends
successfully and the agreement is implemented. Conversely,
if p1
i→j is rejected and aj decides to opt out, negotiation
terminates with no agreement. In the last case, negotiation
proceeds to the next time period t =2 , in which aj makes
a counter-proposal p2
j→i (see Figure 1). The tasks just
described are then repeated.
192
192
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

During actual negotiation, the agents make decisions
according to their strategies. Typical strategies include:
• concession making or yielding : agents reduce their
demands or aspirations to accommodate the opponent;
• problem solving or integrating : agents maintain their
aspirations and try to ﬁnd ways of reconciling them
with the aspirations of their opponent.
Concession making can take several different forms. For
instance, agents can demonstrate good will and make one
or more substantial concessions that seek reciprocal con-
cessions. Such overt concessions aim at eliciting counter
concessions and are risky. Hence, they are more likely to be
made when the opponent is trusted. When trust is low, agents
may turn to one of a host of less risky moves. These include
fractionation of concessions —agents start with a relatively
riskless action and move on toward increasing levels of
risk. They make a small concession and wait to see if the
opponent reciprocates. If so, they then may feel sufﬁciently
conﬁdent to venture a larger concession (see, e.g., [12]).
Problem solving aims at ﬁnding agreements that appeal
to all sides, both individually and collectively. The host of
existing problem solving strategies includes:
1) logrolling: the parties agree to exchange concessions
on different issues, with each party yielding on issues
that are of low priority to itself and high priority to
the other party;
2) nonspeciﬁc compensation: one party achieves its goals
and pays off the opponent for accommodating its
interests.
Logrolling and compensation are two major routes—though
not the only routes—to the development of optimal agree-
ments. Logrolling involves an exchange of concessions on
issues that are already on the negotiating agenda. In contrast,
compensation involves an exchange of concessions on issues
that are not on the agenda—one party gets what it wants and
the other is repaid on some additional, unrelated issues.
The post-negotiation process addresses the closing task
of building commitment and implementing a mutually ac-
ceptable agreement. Central to this process is the notion
of “commitment”—it provides the basis of trust on which
agents perform their part of agreement. The degree of
commitment to an agreement is established by incurring
costs if agents fail to comply with its terms. The larger these
costs, the more the agents will regard the commitment as
binding.
Negotiation may end in agreement, wherein the parties
mutually agree to a proposal, or in no agreement, wherein
the parties break off negotiation or reach a deadline. Figure 1
shows a graph of the dynamics of the negotiation process.
Such graphs can be generated on the ﬂy during the course
of negotiation, and the one in the ﬁgure was generated at
the very end of negotiation.
IV . C ONCLUSION
This paper has presented some important features of
an agent-based system for bilateral contracting in retail
electricity markets. Buyer and Seller agents are equipped
with a model of individual behavior and a negotiation frame-
work that handles two-party and multi-issue negotiation.
They interact according to the rules of an alternating offers
protocol and can pursue strategies motivated by rules-of-
thumb distilled from good behavioral practice in real-life
negotiations.
As this research progresses, we aim to address coalition
formation and management, contracts that involve both
different levels of commitment and different sanctions for
decommitment, and multiple concurrent bilateral negotia-
tions.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Harp, S. Brignone, F. Wollenberg and T. Samad, SEPIA:
A Simulator for the Electric Power Industry Agents, IEEE
Control Systems Magazine , pp 53–69, August 2000.
[2] D. Kirschen and G. Strbac, Fundamentals of Power System
Economics, Chichester, England: Wiley, 2004.
[3] V . Koritarov, Real-World Market Representation with Agents:
Modeling the Electricity Market as a Complex Adaptive
System with an Agent-Based Approach, IEEE Power &
Energy Magazine , pp 39–46, July/August 2004.
[4] F. Lopes, N. Mamede, A. Q. Novais and H. Coelho, A
Negotiation Model for Autonomous Computational Agents:
Formal Description and Empirical Evaluation, Journal of
Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems , 12, pp. 195–212, 2002.
[5] F. Lopes, N. Mamede, A. Q. Novais and H. Coelho, Ne-
gotiation Strategies for Autonomous Computational Agents,
In: 16th European Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ECAI-04),
IOS Press, pp 38–42, 2004.
[6] F. Lopes, M. Wooldridge and A. Q. Novais, Negotia-
tion Among Autonomous Computational Agents: Principles,
Analysis and Challenges, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review , 29,
pp. 1–44, 2008.
[7] F. Lopes and H. Coelho, Concession Strategies for Negotiat-
ing Bilateral Contracts in Multi-agent Electricity Markets, In:
IA TEM-12 Workshop and DEXA-12 Event, IEEE Computer
Society Press, pp. 321-325, 2012.
[8] F. Lopes, T. Rodrigues and J. Sousa, Negotiating Bilateral
Contracts in a Multi-agent Electricity Market: A Case Study,
In: IA TEM-12 Workshop and DEXA-12 Event, IEEE Com-
puter Society Press, pp. 326-330, 2012.
[9] F. Lopes, H. Algarvio and H. Coelho, Bilateral Contracting
in Multi-agent Electricity Markets: Negotiation Strategies and
a Case Study, In: International Conference on the European
Energy Market (EEM-13), IEEE Computer Society Press,
2013.
[10] F. Lopes, C. Ilco and J. Sousa, Bilateral Negotiation in
Energy Markets: Strategies for Promoting Demand Response,
In: International Conference on the European Energy Market
(EEM-13), IEEE Computer Society Press, 2013.
[11] M. Osborne and A. Rubinstein, Bargaining and Markets , San
Diego: Academic Press, 1990.
[12] D. Pruitt, Negotiation Behavior , New Y ork, USA: Academic
Press, 1981.
193
193
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:07:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
