Agent-based simulation of consumer purchase decision-making
and the decoy effect ☆
Tao Zhang ⁎, David Zhang
Exeter Manufacturing Enterprise Centre (XMEC), School of Engineering, Computer Science and Mathematics, University of Exeter , Room 204, Harrison Building,
North Park Road, Exeter , Devon, EX4 4QF , UK
Received 1 March 2006; received in revised form 1 December 2006; accepted 1 February 2007
Abstract
Consumer behavior research involves various areas: psychology, marketing, sociology, economics and engineering. This paper presents an
agent-based model (ABM) of consumer purchase decision-making. The core of this model is a motivation function that combines consumers'
psychological personality traits with two important kinds of interactions in a competitive market. The model reveals the inner psychological
mechanism on the basis of which consumers make their choices when facing competing brands on the market. By creating a large number of
heterogeneous consumer agents in an artificial market, this study uses multi-agent simulation (MAS) to exhibit the emergent decoy effect
phenomenon, which is a market dynamic phenomenon originating from the individual behavior of heterogeneous consumers and their interactions
in the real-world complex market. The combined use of the ABM and the MAS method in studying consumer behavior and markets gives one the
potential to cope with the dynamic changes and complexities in the real-world business environment.
© 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Agent; Motivation function; Price sensitivity; Quality sensitivity
1. Introduction
The process in which consumers make their purchase
decisions has long been of great interest to researchers and
practitioners ( Burnett and Lundford, 1994 ). The purchase
decision-making process and the interactions among consumers
based on this process generate market dynamics, such as the
decoy effect and lock-in, which are hard to explain. Research into
consumer purchase decision-making and consumers' interactions
increases the understanding of such market dynamics. Traditional
studies on consumer decision patterns, such as data mining, focus
on using static equilibrium-based mathematical and statistical
techniques to model consumers' socio-demographic and behav-
ioral data. However, three types of data exist regarding consumer
purchase decisions: 1) demographic data, 2) behavioral data, and
3) psychographic data ( Rud, 2001 ). Psychographic data,
characterized by attitudes, opinions, lifestyle characteristics, or
personal values, are of great importance in consumer purchase
decision-making. A challenge to researchers and practitioners is
how to use psychographic data to model consumer purchase
decision-making as well as dynamically emergent phenomena in
markets. This issue involves research in the fields of psychology,
economics, sociology and marketing, which is in line with the
research of the agent-based computational simulation of complex
social systems. Therefore, the newly developed agent concept in
artificial intelligence has triggered great expectations to cope with
this topic. An agent is a highly abstract concept, and researchers
still do not agree about the issues what an agent actually is and
what exactly constitutes an agent ( Poggi, 1999 ). The general
Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 – 922
☆ The authors initially presented this paper at the workshop of agent-based
simulation of market dynamics and consumer behavior, at the University of
Surrey, 17–18th, January 2006. Unilever financially sponsored the workshop,
and the authors would like thank Unilever and the workshop committee for
providing a chance to present their work. The research was highly supported by
members of the Exeter Manufacturing Enterprise Center (XMEC), for which
they deserve praise. The development of this model was based on other
researchers' previous work, and the program was run in NetLogo, developed by
researchers in the Northwest University, USA. The authors gratefully
acknowledge their efforts.
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1392 263613; fax: +44 1392 217965.
E-mail address: TZ207@ex.ac.uk (T. Zhang).
0148-2963/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.02.006

opinion regarding agents in artificial intelligence is that any entity
with some of the following attributes can be considered as an
intelligent agent: 1) autonomous behavior, 2) individual world-
view, 3) communicative and cooperative capacity, 4) intelligent
behavior; and 5) spatial mobility ( d'Inverno and Luck, 2004 ).
Based on these characteristics, agents have been widely applied in
engineering, computer science, economics, and sociology. Agent-
based simulation (ABS) is a bottom-up technique that has offered
a robust tool to cope with the complexities in a complex system
environment (Grimm et al., 2005). Researchers have used agents
in the aforementioned areas to simulate machines, software
entities, economic entities, animals, human beings, and human
society. In the recent 5 years, the application of agents in
marketing research has significantly gained momentum (for
example, the CUBES model (Ben Said et al., 2001), the SimStore
Model (Casti, 1999), and J-Pop Simulation ( Makoto, 2000), and
the success of these models has shown that they are effective tools
in marketing research. Currently researchers are interested in
using agents and multi-agent systems to simulate consumer
behavior and marketing dynamics. The purpose of this simulation
is to optimize supply chains, evaluate the influence of
governmental economic policies on business, and to improve
companies' marketing performance in a competitive market by
achieving an in-depth understanding of the psychology of
consumers and the sociology of consumer groups or networks.
The first step is to develop an agent-based consumer purchase
decision-making model based on the classic psychological
reasoned action theory (Ajzen and Fishbein, 2005), the conscious
intention and motivation concept ( McClelland, 1987 )a n d
consumer–sociological interactions. The core idea of the model
is that each brand of a product can trigger a purchase motivation
that drives an agent's purchase decision. When facing multiple
purchase choices, the agent will calculate all purchase motiva-
tions, compare them, and choose the one that brings the most
advantage. This paper introduces an algorithm derived from this
agent-based consumer purchase decision-making model, to
control an agent's buying behavior. The authors present this
algorithm in the form of a motivation function. This study has
created a virtual market by using a large number of artificial
consumer agents to simulate the emergent marketing phenome-
non, called the decoy effect. The algorithm controls these agents'
buying behaviors. The multi-agent simulation of the decoy effect
has validated the effectiveness of the agent-based purchase
decision-making model and provided the potential to explore and
predict dynamic market variations, e.g. fluctuations in market
shares, the influence of economic government policies, techno-
logical innovations, and a market's responses to expected or
unexpected events. The contents of the sections of this paper are
the following:
Section 2 illustrates the consumer purchase decision model
currently used in marketing science. This traditional model is a
contrast to the newly developed agent-based purchase decision-
making model, which highlights the originality of this paper.
Traditional marketing models dealing with consumer purchase
decision-making focus more on a management point of view.
These models identify the many factors that affect consumer
purchase decisions and behaviors. However, none of them have
revealed the inner psychological process of the consumer pur-
chase decision. By introducing the motivation concept, a
psychological term that measures the degree of a consumer's
intention to buy a product, the resulting agent-based model can
fill this gap.
Section 3 explains the development of the agent-based model
in detail. First, the section introduces classical behavior
psychology theories, such as reasoned action, planned behavior
(Ajzen and Fishbein, 2005 ), and conscious intention and
motivation ( McClelland, 1987 ), which are the fundamental
theories of the agent-based purchase decision-making model.
Next, the section describes the development of the agent-based
model, which is based on consumer psychology and two kinds of
sociological interactions in the real market. After that, Section 3
introduces an algorithm to control agents' buying behaviors,
taken from the agent-based purchase decision-making model. The
algorithm has the form of a motivation function, and the authors
make detailed suggestions concerning its form.
Section 4 demonstrates the decoy effect, an emergent
marketing phenomenon, by conducting a multi-agent simula-
tion. After introducing the details of the decoy effect, including
the concept and recent studies, Section 4 will focus on the
simulation experiments, in particular the parameters and
variables used, the results, and the analysis of these results.
Finally, Sections 5 and 6 point out the originality and
significance of the paper, its limitations, and offer suggestions
for further research.
2. The traditional theoretical framework for the consumer
purchase decision
Since the 1960s, marketing science has produced a huge
volume of literature on the various aspects of consumer
behavior. Engel, Blackwell, and Miniard (1995) present the
most recognized model of consumer purchase decision-making.
This model divides the consumer purchase decision process into
5 stages: 1) problem recognition, 2) information search, 3)
alternative evaluation, 4) purchase decision, and 5) post-
purchase behavior. Fig. 1 shows this framework.
With the aid of this model, Engel et al. (1995) have also
identified some factors that affect consumer purchase decision-
making. These factors fall into three categories: 1) personal,
2) psychological and 3) social. The model provides an oper-
ational marketing management tool, while consumer behavior
theory has become the most prevalent one in the marketing
arena. However, so far researchers have published little lit-
erature on the question how these factors interact to form the
inner psychological purchase decision-making process.
3. An agent-based model of the purchase decision-making
process
3.1. Psychological theory of behavior and decision-making
Decision-making is a complex cognitive process involving
perception, learning and information processing. AsEngel et al.'s
(1995) model (Fig. 1) shows, most of the consumers' purchases
913T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

are planned behaviors. “A central factor in the theory of planned
behavior is the individual's intention to perform a given behavior.
Intentions are assumed to capture the motivational factors that
influence a behavior; they are indications of how hard people are
willing to try, of how much of an effort they are planning to exert,
in order to perform the behavior. As a general rule, the stronger the
intention to engage in a behavior, the more likely should be its
performance" (Ajzen, 1991, p181). The reasoned action model
(Ajzen and Fishbein, 2005), as shown in Fig. 2,a l s os u g g e s t st h a t
intention is the immediate antecedent of actual behavior,
influenced by a wide range of background factors. McClelland
(1987) divides intentions into two categories: conscious intention
and unconscious intention, while also suggesting that motivation
is the reflection of conscious intentions formed by observing
behaviors.
3.2. The purchase motivation model
Most of the purchase decisions are reasoned actions.
Therefore, intention in the purchase decision-making process
refers to conscious intention, and one can consider motivation as
the direct determinant of the purchase decision. A method to
discover motivation is to study what makes people reach logical
decisions (McFarland, 1974). Based on marketing theory, the key
stimuli that lead consumers to make their purchase decisions in
the complex business environment are prices, quality, brands of
products, advertisements, friends'/families' recommendations
and disqualifications and consumers' previous purchase experi-
ences. The consumer's personality traits determine how these
external stimuli affect him/her.Ajzen (2005)defines personality as
a characteristic of an individual that exerts pervasive influence on
a broad range of trait-relevant responses. On this basis the
consumer purchase motivation model consists of three parts:
external stimuli, personality traits, and motivation (see Fig. 3).
3.3. The purchase decision model
Before constructing the model, the assumption has to be that
consumers make purchases based on logical decisions, which is
in line with the reasoned action and conscious intention
theories. From this perspective, an individual consumer is an
agent, and a group of artificial agents together with some
brands within one particular product category form an artificial
market. All agents have their own personality traits and their
socio-economic interactions are based on their counterparts in
the real market. In this virtual market consumer behavior
depends on which brand an agent would choose, as shown in
Fig. 4 .
An agent has two types of interactions. One is the interaction
between the agent him/herself and the brand managers. This
type of interaction occurs in various forms of marketing
activities. For example, interaction with respect to issues such as
price, quality of the product, advertising, distribution channels,
etc. The other type refers to the interactions among heteroge-
neous consumer agents. As Ben Said et al. (2001) indicate, the
interactions among the consumer agents are based on
recommendation or disqualification by family, friends or
opinion leaders, or on rumors among the agent groups, etc.
These two types of interaction are shown in Fig. 5 .
Fig. 2. The theory of reasoned action and planned behavior ( Ajzen and Fishbein, 2005 , p194).
Fig. 1. Traditional theoretical consumer purchase decision model.
914 T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

The stimuli derived from the above two types of interaction
have a great influence on the agent's motivation to buy the
product. However, the agents' personality traits determine the
stimuli's influencing powers, as the purchase motivation model in
Fig. 3 shows. Therefore, based on the stimuli related to the two
types of interactions, one can derive their relevant personality
traits, namely price sensitivity, quality sensitivity, susceptibility,
and follower tendency. Each stimulus' contribution to the agent's
purchase motivation is calibrated by the agent's relevant
personality trait. For example, if an agent is not price sensitive,
then the price has little influence on his/her motivation to buy a
product. Additionally, the agent's socio-demographic attributes,
such as age, income, educational level, and professional status,
may greatly influence the agent's personality traits. For instance, a
millionaire might not think a £5 cake is expensive, whereas an
unemployed person might think it is very expensive, because
millionaires are less price-sensitive than the unemployed are. Due
to the great influence of socio-demographic attributes upon the
agent's personality traits, the purchase decision model has to take
into account such attributes. Fig. 6 demonstrates the agent's
purchase decision model.
3.4. The motivation function
As shown in Fig. 6, in the purchase decision-making process
the external stimuli are the independent variables. Once an
agent has perceived these independent variables, he/she will be
psychologically processed in line with his/her relevant person-
ality traits. After the processing, the agent has established a
purchase motivation. With different choices, the agent will
achieve different levels of motivation. The preferred choice is
the one that can bring the agent the largest degree of motivation.
Purchase decision-making is a cognitive process in which the
stimuli and personality traits can be defined by certain
algorithms. Suppose N brands of a product are present in the
artificial market. If one considers the stimuli as independent
variables, and the personality traits as the coefficients of these
independent variables, the motivation function, which repre-
sents this algorithm, is as shown below:
Mi ¼ PSi /C2 Pi þ QSi /C2 Qi þ susi /C2 adi þ fti /C2 infli ð1Þ
Mi is the motivation brand i (i =1 t o N) of a consumer agent.
QSi is the agent's quality sensitivity parameter to brand i; Qi is
the quality of brand i; susi is the agent's susceptibility parameter
to brand i's advertisements; ad i is the advertising intensity of
brand i;f t i is the agent's follower tendency parameter of the
perceived influence exerted by other agents regarding brand i;
infli is the perceived influence exerted by other agents with
respect to brand i;P Si is the agent's price sensitivity parameter
to brand i; and Pi is the price of brand i.
3.5. Model calibration
In order to computationally simulate the decoy effect, the first
step is to calibrate the motivation function, i.e. working out the
detailed formula and setting the proper values of coefficients and
parameters. In the first part of the motivation function, PS i,t h e
parameter of the personality trait price sensitivity, is the
coefficient of the stimulus Pi. A Dutch psychologist, Peter van
Westendorp, originally devised price sensitivity in the 1970s.
Price sensitivity is an analysis of price elasticity based on the
monetary, utilitarian, and emotional value that consumers
attribute to a product or service. In this model, price sensitivity
is one of the agent's personality traits and the model uses this
concept to measure the degree to which price can trigger
hindrance to an agent's motivation to buy a product . It is a
negative figure because price definitely has an adverse effect on
the purchase motivation. Each Pi can trigger a PS i (i =1 t o N)
based on an agent's price sensitivity personality trait. The price
sensitivity distribution model (Kim et al., 1995) suggests that the
lower a brand's price, the less price sensitivity this brand
Fig. 4. Consumer behavior in an artificial market.
 Fig. 5. An agents' two kinds of interactions.
Fig. 3. Purchase motivation model.
915T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

generates, i.e. the brand triggers less hindrance to an agent's
purchase motivation. K i me ta l ' s( 1 9 9 5 )research also indicates
that a consumer's price sensitivity is an exponential function of
the difference between the real price of a product and the expected
price of the product, as shown in Eq. (2).
PSi ¼ −aPi −Pe þ k ð2Þ
where α is a parameter and α N 1, k is a constant (the value of k is
based on an agent's socio-economic attributes, e.g. millionaires
are less price sensitive than unemployed persons) and Pe is the
agent's expected price of this type of product. Pe is difficult to
derive and can be substituted with the average price of the
product, i.e. one can set:
Pe ¼ Pave ¼ 1
N
XN
i¼1
Pi ð3Þ
where N is the number of brands of the product, Pi is the price of
brand i,a n dPave is the average price of all brands of the product.
Thus based on Eqs. (2) and (3), the result is:
PSi ¼ −aPi −Pave þ k ð4Þ
Similar to the first part in the motivation function, QS i,t h e
parameter of the personality trait quality sensitivity is the
coefficient of the stimulus Q i. The psychological term quality
sensitivity serves to measure the degree to which the quality of a
brand can propel an agent's motivation to buy a product. In terms
of quality, quality sensitivity is a multi-dimensional variable,
because a brand may have qualities in different aspects, e.g. a
mobile phone may be used to make calls, send text or picture
messages and surf the Internet. Assuming brandi of a product has
m qualities, then the overall quality of brandi in the model can be
computed as:
Qi ¼
Xm
j¼1
WjQij
where Qij is brand i'sq u a l i t yj,a n d Wj,w h i c hc a nb eu s e dt o
measure how importantQij is to an agent, is the weight ofQij.T h e
outlier avoidance consumer psychological theory ( Patel and
Schlijper, 2004) suggests that, when a consumer chooses a brand,
the closer the quality of the brand approximates the consumer's
expected quality of this kind of product, the more sensitive the
consumer is to the quality of this brand. The mathematical
formula is then:
QSi ¼ bjQi −Qej þ L ð5Þ
where QSi is the parameter of an agent's quality sensitivity
triggered by brand i's quality Qi, β is a parameter and
0> β >1 , a n d L is a constant (the value of L i sb a s e do na n
agent's socio-economic attributes). Consumer lifestyle research
Fig. 6. The purchase decision model.
916 T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

carried out by Gardyn (2002) indicates that consumers from
upper social classes pay more attention to the quality of the
goods and services when making purchase decisions. Qe is the
agent's expected quality of this type of products, which one can
substitute with the average quality of all brands of the product
type, i.e. the formula is:
Qe ¼ Qave ¼ 1
N
XN
i¼1
Qi ð6Þ
where Qave is the average quality of all brands of the product.
Accordingly, based on Eqs. (5) and (6), this results in:
QSi ¼ bjQi−Qavej þ L ð7Þ
In accordance with the third and fourth part of the motivation
function, an agent accepts the advertisement and influence from
other people's stimuli, processes them and assigns psychological
parameters to them on the basis of his/her personality traits,
susceptibility and follower tendency. In order to highlight the
price–quality trade-off during the decoy effect, this multi-agent
simulation of the decoy effect bases the psychological parameters
produced on the personality traits constants “susceptibility” and
“follower tendency ”. Hence, the following two equations are
obtained:
susi ¼ h ð8Þ
fti ¼ k ð9Þ
where θ and λ are two constants.
Combining the Eqs. (1), (4), (7) –(9), the detailed formula of
the motivation function is:
Mi ¼ −aPi −Pave þ k
/C0/C1
/C2 Pi þ bjQi−Qavej þ L
/C16/C17
/C2 Qi þ h /C2 adi
þ k /C2 infli
So an agent's final purchase decision is based on the algorithm:
max { M1, M2, M3,…, Mi}
The brand that can bring an agent the largest degree of
motivation is the agent's final choice.
4. Multi-agent simulation of the decoy effect
4.1. The decoy effect
If two brands of a product are available in a market, brand A
and brand B, consumers have to make a choice between the two. If
brand A has a superior quality but its price is much higher than
that of brand B, consumers face a price/quality trade-off. If
however, a third brand C (usually called a decoy), which is
inferior to brand B in both price and quality, appears on the
market, this may affect consumer choice. V arious experiments
have shown that, although no consumer will choose brand C
(which is obviously inferior, as shown in Fig. 7 ), its mere
appearance causes a substantial shift of preference from A to B.
Marketing researchers call this effect the decoy effect. This effect
is one of the most robust biases in consumer choice. V arious
product classes, ranging from chocolate bars or beer to TV-sets,
have employed this instrument (Devetag, 1999).
In a famous study on the decoy effect, Huber, Payne, and
Puto (1982) asked participants to choose between a five-star
restaurant, which was a 25-min. drive away and a three-star
restaurant, which was 5 min away. The subjective benefit of
the five-star restaurant's better services is equal to the
subjective benefit of the three-star restaurant's shorter driving
distance. Two decoy experiments took place. When the
researchers added a four-star restaurant with a 35-min. drive
to the choice set as a decoy, the result showed that the
participants tended to prefer th e five-star restaurant that was
25 min away. However, when the decoy was a two-star res-
taurant 15 min away, the result showed that the participants'
preferences had switched to the three-star restaurant 5 min
away.
The Decoy effect illustrates the significant importance of
consumer psychology, of understanding how consumers
perceive products, and how consumers judge quality prior to
purchasing the product (e.g. Doyle et al., 1999 ). This has long
been of great interest to marketing scientists and psychologists.
Min (2003) summarizes three types of decoy: an asymmetri-
cally dominated decoy ( Heath and Chatterjee, 1995; Huber
et al., 1982), a phantom decoy ( Highhouse, 1982; Pratkanis and
Farquhar, 1992 ) and a compromise decoy ( Simonson, 1989,
1992). Although these decoys differ in terms of their
relationship with other options in a choice set of products,
their availability and the underlying mechanisms proposed to
account for their impact all have a positive effect on the target
product (Min, 2003). The decoy effect mechanism has attracted
the interests of many researchers and the explanation of this
phenomenon is a big challenge. Many publications on the
mechanisms and applications of the decoy effect have appeared
since the 1980s, including comparison-induced decoy effects
(Choplin and Hummel, 2005 ), loss aversion ( Highhouse, 1982;
Tversky and Kahmeman, 1991 ), attribute importance change
(Huber et al., 1982 ), extending compromise effect models to
complex purchase decisions based on the decoy effect ( Kivetz,
2004), ease of justification ( Park, 2005; Simonson, 1989;
Wedell and Pettibone, 1996 ), and a no-numerical explanation
(Quesada et al., 2005 ).
Fig. 7. Decoy effect.
917T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

4.2. The mathematical analysis of an individual decoy effect
The nature of the decoy effect can be revealed by analyzing an
individual consumer's motivation that changes from brand A to
brand B after the introduction of the decoy. For example,
consider a consumer whose initial choice is brand A, but the
difference in his/her preferences for brands A and B is very
small, i.e. MA − MB = e where e is a parameter and is near 0. The
smaller e is, the easier the consumer is affected by the decoy.
If d P is used to represent the difference between a brand's
price and the average price of the product category, while d Q
serves to indicate the difference between a brand's quality and
the average quality of the product category, and MA and MB
denote the consumer's motivations for brand A and B, one
obtains the following equations:
dPA ¼ PA−Pave
dPB ¼ PB−Pave
dQA ¼ QA−Qave
dQB ¼ QB−Qave
MA ¼ −adPA þ k
/C0/C1
/C2 PA þ bjdQAj þ L
/C16/C17
/C2 QA þ h
/C2 adA þ k /C2 inflA ð11Þ
MB ¼ −ad PB þ k
/C0/C1
/C2 PB þ bjdQBj þ L
/C16/C17
/C2 QB þ h
/C2 adB þ k /C2 inflB ð12Þ
After the entry of the decoy, d P′ and dQ′ serve to denote the
new difference between a brand's price and the average price of
the product category and the new difference between a brand's
quality and the average quality of the product category
respectively. MA and MB, the consumer's new motivations for
brand A and B, and adA′,i n f lA′ adB′ and inflB′ serve to denote brands
A and B's new advertising intensities and their influences on
consumers. On this basis one obtains the following equations:
dP VA ¼ PA− PA þ PB þ PCðÞ =3
dP VB ¼ PB− PA þ PB þ PCðÞ =3
dQ VA ¼ QA− QA þ QB þ QCðÞ =3
dQ VB ¼ QB− QA þ QB þ QCðÞ =3
M VA ¼ −adP VA þ k
/C0/C1
/C2 PA þ bjdQ VAj þ L
/C16/C17
/C2 QA þ h
/C2 ad VA þ k /C2 inflVA ð13Þ
M VB ¼ −adP VB þ k
/C0/C1
/C2 PB þ bjdQ VBj þ L
/C16/C17
/C2 QB þ h
/C2 adVB þ k /C2 inflVB ð14Þ
By using Eq. (13) minus Eq. (11), and Eq. (14) minus
Eq. (12), one obtains the following equations:
M VA−MA ¼ adPA−adP VA/C0/C1
/C2 PA þ bjdQ VAj−bjdQAj
/C16/C17
/C2 QA þ adVA−adAðÞ /C2 h
þ infl VA−inflAðÞ /C2 k
ð15Þ
M VB−MB ¼ adPB−adP VB/C0/C1
/C2 PB þ bjdQ VBj−bjdQBj
/C16/C17
/C2 Q þ ad VB−adBðÞ /C2 h
þ infl VB−inflBðÞ /C2 k
ð16Þ
Eq. (15) minus Eq. (16) results in Eq. (17).
M VA −M VB ¼ adPA−adP VA/C0/C1
/C2 PA− adPB−adP VB/C0/C1
/C2 PB
þ bdQ VA−bdQA/C0/C1
/C2 QA− bdQ VB−bdQB/C0/C1
/C2 QB
þ ad VA−adA−ad VB þ adBðÞ /C2 h
þ infl VA−inflA−infl VB þ inflBðÞ /C2 k þ e ð17Þ
Suppose E1 is the quality –price average point before the
entry of the decoy, and E2 is the new quality –price average
point after the entry of the decoy. Fig. 8 demonstrates their
relationship.
Based on the properties of the exponential functions, one
can analyze the result of Eq. (17). As shown in Fig. 9, αdP′A −
αdP′A NαdP′B −αdPB N 0, andPA NPB N 0, therefore (αdPA −αdP′A)×
PA − (αdPB − αdP′B)× PB > 0. On the other hand, with Fig. 10 ,
Fig. 8. The average points.
Fig. 9. The changes of price sensitivities.
 Fig. 10. The changes of quality sensitivities.
918 T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

β |dQ′A|; − β |dQA| >0 , β|dQ′B| − β|dQB| N 0, together with PA N 0
and PB N 0, results in ( β |dQ′A| − β |dQA|)× QA − (β |dQ′B| − β |dQB|)×
QB > 0. As the analysis focuses on an individual consumer's
decoy effect, the model assumes that the decoy's entry does not
mathematically change ad A,i n f lA,a d B and infl B (i.e. a con-
s u m e rw h oh a sb e e na f f e c t e db yt h ed e c o yw o u l d
not exert influence on other consumers), therefore (ad ′A − adA −
ad′B +a dB)× θ = 0, and (infl′A − inflA −infl′B +i n f lB)× λ =0 . M o r e -
over, as e i sa s s u m e dt ob en e a rt o0 ,o n ec a ni n f e rt h a tE q .( 1 7 )
is less that 0, i.e.
M VA−M VB > 0
Thus, from the initial MA NMB to the current M′A >M′B,t h e
consumer has shifted his/her preference from A to B.
The mathematical analysis of an individual consumer's shift of
preference is similar to the research on the decoy effect previously
presented in key publications. Both focus on the aspect of an
individual consumer's psychology and choice behavior. Howev-
er, this static equation-based analysis includes many assumptions.
For example, e is very small, and the entry of the decoy on the
market does not change ad A,i n f lA,a dB and inflB.A d d i t i o n a l l y ,
mathematical analysis can only partially explain the decoy effect.
For example, if the price of the decoy falls into the area betweenP–
and PA, mathematical analysis can hardly confirm whether Eq.
(17) is larger or smaller than 0, which causes uncertainty.
Actually, the shift of an individual consumer's preference is not
only an independent individual behavioral pattern, but also, and in
some cases perhaps more so, a pattern strongly related to the
sociology of consumer groups or networks, e.g. the actual
Fig. 11. Agents' distribution and interactions. Note: each agent is distributed in a
grid, named a patch in NetLogo. In the simulation, each patch is the area where
an agent lives. A grid may have no agents or more than one agent. The
simulation assumes that an agent has interactions with other agents distributed
less than 3 times radius away from where it stands. The larger the number of
times radius, the more interactions an agent has. If the number of times radius is
equal to the value of screen-edge-x, the simulation becomes a small world
simulation as each agent fully interacts with all the other agents in the artificial
market. Advertising intensity is randomly distributed, ranging from 0 to 100 in
each grid. For details about patches, turtles, number of times radius and screen-
edge-x, please see the Manual of NetLogo 3.0.2.
Table 1
The scale and distribution of variables/parameters in the simulation
V ariables/
parameters
Scale Distribution
Income 0 –1000 Random normal distribution, μ = 600 and σ =7 5
L 0–100 Depends on income
K − 100–0 Depends on income
ad 0 –100 Random distribution
PA 80–100 Random distribution
QA 80–100 Random distribution
PB 0–20 Random distribution
QB 0–20 Random distribution
Pdecoy PB >P decoy >PA Random distribution
Qdecoy Qdecoy > QB Random distribution
Influ_out 0 –100 Random normal distribution, μ = 30 and σ =2 0
susi 0–100 Random normal distribution, μ = 55 and σ =2 0
fti 0–100 Random normal distribution, μ = 55 and σ =2 0
A α > 1 Depends on training and testing
B0 > β > 1 Depends on training and testing
Fig. 12. Decoy effect: the market situation before and after the decoy's entry.
A: Market situation before the decoy's entry. B: Market situation after the
decoy's entry.
919T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

situation in a real market is that the entry of the decoy on the
market does change adA,i n f lA,a dB and inflB. However, the static
mathematical model reveals this dynamic process insufficiently.
From a macro point of view, the decoy effect is a dynamically
emergent marketing phenomenon that involves the preference
changes of a large number of consumers and their sociological
interactions. Therefore, although the decoy effect is not
fundamentally the result of interactions, by using multi-agent
computational simulation and taking into account the sociological
interactions among heterogeneous consumers, one is capable of
further exploring the decoy effect. However, until now little
literature on computational simulation of the decoy effect has
been presented. Based on the aforementioned agent-based
purchase decision model, the authors exhibit the decoy effect
dynamically by means of computational simulation.
4.3. The simulation
The authors programmed the motivation function with
NetLogo 3.0.2. In order to reduce the complexity of the
simulation in this virtual market, the authors used income to
represent all of the agent's socio-economic attributes, e.g. age,
housing status, and professional status. The simulation assumed
the agents' incomes as ranging from 0 to 1000, normally
distributed with μ = 600 and σ = 75. Agents' price and quality
sensitivity parameters ranged from 0 to 100 and were controlled
by the constants k and L, on the basis of the agents' incomes; α
and β were tested for and adjusted iteratively to model
optimization. The constants θ and λ, (indications of the agents'
personality traits susceptibility and follower tendency, normally
distributed with μ = 55 and σ = 20) ranged from 0 to 100.
The simulation distributed the artificial consumer agents
randomly in different areas, and each consumer agent interacted
with other agents distributed within X (X is adjustable) times of
radius from where the agent was located ( Fig. 11) The larger X,
the more interactions the agent had.
In each area advertising intensity was randomly distributed,
ranging from 0 to 100. The variable influ_out, normally distributed
with μ=3 0 a n dσ = 20 and ranging from 0 to 100, represented an
agent's influence on other agents, and another variable influ_in
represented the influence an agent perceived from the other
interacting agents. The simulation started from the assumption that
an agent interacted with other agents distributed less than 3 times
radius from where the agent was located, the value of the agent's
influ_in being the sum of the valuesof these agents' influ_out. With
more interactions in the simulation, the number of times radius
increased, which appeared to make the model more complex. The
random distribution of the price and quality of brand Awas between
80 to 100, and the price and quality of brand B between 0 and 20.
Table 1 shows the scales and distrib utions of the variables and
parameters.
Fig. 13. The price of the decoy and market share.
Fig. 14. Shaded area: best decoy area.
920 T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

4.4. Experiment results
The simulation created an artificial market with 1000
consumer agents. The computer randomly picked up values of
parameters and variables of each agent, based on the rules set in
Table 1, which resulted in a high level of heterogeneity in the
artificial market. The simulation results show that, at the entry of
the decoy, the decoy effect was highly obvious. When the model
ran one time step, the results were as shown in Fig. 12. Y ellow
agents were those who chose brand B, and blue agents were those
who chose brand A. The decoy's entry on the market caused a
substantial shift of preferences from A to B.
When checking the parameters of the agents who switched
their preferences, the difference between their motivations for
brand A ( MA) and their motivations for B ( MB)a p p e a r e dt ob e
very small. Thus, external stimuli easily lured these agents.
Therefore, in practical marketing, changes in promotional tactics
can easily influence this group of consumers. This finding is also
in line with the assumption thate is very small in the mathematical
analysis of an individual consumer's preference change.
However, when checking the agents who never switched their
preferences, the differences betweenMA and MB were very large,
so these agents were either loyal to brand A or to brand B. Another
discovery of the simulation was the best decoy area. When
checking the decoy's price and market share, the results showed
that whenever the price of the decoy fell into the area between
brand B's price and the average price of brand A and B, i.e.
PB > Pdecoy >(PA + PB) / 2, the shift of the agents' preferences from
A to B was very explicit. However, if PdecoyN (PA + PB) / 2, the
decoy effect becomes obscure. The price of decoy and market
share curves in Fig. 13 demonstrate this. If marketers want to use
the decoy effect in marketing, they can find a best decoy area
based on the simulation ( Fig. 14 ). This finding explains the
uncertainty found in the mathematical analysis.
The authors conducted further research by changing the
number of times of radius (from the default, which is 3), which
can increase the value of influ_in (the influence that an agent
perceives from other agents). The results show that the decoy
had lured more agents, which indicates that, in a real business
environment, intensive market competitions and word-of-
mouth could decrease consumers' loyalty and make their
behaviors more changeable and complex. In addition, the
experimental results show that although the nature of the decoy
effect is from the consumers' psychological perspective about
price–quality tradeoff, which seems to be more an individual
behavior than a group-collective behavior, the consumers'
sociological interactions still account for a very important part
of the decoy effect. If one sets the number of times of radius at
nil (which means no interactions among the agents at all), the
entry of the decoy only affects a few agents.
5. Conclusions
Compared with other research on consumer behavior, the
agent-based model of consum er purchase decision-making
and the multi-agent simulation of the decoy effect form a
novel area in the multidisciplin ary research that integrates
marketing, psychology, sociology, engineering, and computer
science. With respect to dynami cally exhibiting and predicting
market dynamics in a flexible manner, the traditional static
equilibrium-based statistical and mathematical models lack
robustness. The kind of computational simulation of consum-
er behavior presented here, however, has offered a new
approach to fill this gap. The computational simulation is an
effective novel business mana gement tool. For example, this
type of simulation enables one to conduct various experiments
in the artificial market by chang ing the parameters to find out
how a real market would respond to expected and unexpected
events and to predict the evo lution of this market. If the
fidelity of the agents in the simulation is appropriate, the
business information gained by t his simulation technique will
be much more accurate than that gained by traditional
techniques, such as data mining.
Significantly, this research has also provided an example of a
generic method for simulating other complex systems involving
human beings, whose behavior is difficult to compute. Such
complex systems include outlets, large supermarkets, political
elections, complex manufacturing systems and even complex
ecological systems. The steps in conducting this research are the
following: 1) setting the simulation scope and defining the
agents, 2) designing the proper algorithms based on the agents'
counterparts in the real world to control the agents' behaviors,
interactions and actions, 3) calibrating algorithms and models,
4) programming and running the model, 5) testing, validating
and optimizing the model and, 6) observing and analyzing the
experiment results. This research route can be referred to as a
generic research method based on complex system simulation.
The most important and difficult of the six steps is the algorithm
design based on the agents' counterparts in the real world. The
behaviors and actions of the objects in the real world may be
very complex. If the algorithms are not designed properly, agent
fidelity may be very low, which could hugely undermine the
quality of the simulation results. Therefore, researchers should
pay scrupulous attention to algorithm design.
6. Recommendation and further research
In this type of simulation an issue of debate is whether
consumers' choices are rational. The answer may lie in the
words of Dr. Bryan D. Gross (2004) , President and Chief
Executive Officer of MPSI Systems Inc. at a presentation at the
London School of Economics. When questioned about this, Dr
Gross replied: “We are all consumers. If we were behaving
purely at random then our hypotheses would not enable us to
predict consumer behavior. We might look at the numbers and
say initially that as far as store location was concerned,
consumers were behaving very randomly. But when we add the
other factors and start partitioning up the variability we can
actually see for example, that although location is a significant
driver, consumers are making their decisions very logically. One
of the things that we find is that consumers tend to switch on
and switch off. We have an analysis that we do for price
sensitivity and we see consumers switching on and off to price
as a primary driver. That means that instead of a nice non-linear
921T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922

continuous curve we start to see discontinuities. But it's still
very much the result of logical choice ”.
One limitation of the simulation is that the model ignores the
self-learning ability of consumers. In the real world, consumers
can proactively learn from the environment and gain experi-
ence. The experience accounts for part of the purchase decision.
Another limitation of the simulation is that in order to decrease
the complexity of the model, the researchers used income to
represent all the agents' socio-economic attributes, including
marital status, housing status and professional status. To a
certain degree, this also decreased the degree of agent fidelity.
Further research will focus on these limitations, aiming at
establishing an agent-based model of consumer behavior with
an even higher degree of agent fidelity, and then upgrading this
model to system level by using a multi-agent system to simulate
another emergent lock-in market phenomenon.
References
Ajzen I. The theory of planned behavior. Org Behav Human Decis Process
1991;50:179–211.
Ajzen I, Fishbein M. The influence of attitudes on behavior. In: Albarracin D,
B. Johnson B, Zanna M, editors. The handbook of attitudes. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum; 2005. p. 173 –221.
Ben Said L, Drogoul A, Bouron T. Multi-agent based simulation of consumer
behavior: towards a new marketing approach; 2001. MODSIM.
Burnett MS, Lundford DA. Conceptualizing guilt in the consumer decision-
making process. J Consum Mark 1994;11(3):33 –43.
Casti J. Firm forecast. New Sci 1999;24:37 –40 (April).
Choplin JM, Hummel JE. Comparison-induced decoy effects. Mem Cogn
2005;33(2):332–43.
Devetag MG. From utilities to mental models: a critical survey on decision rules
and cognition in consumer choice. Ind Corp Change 1999;8(2):289 –351.
d'Inverno M, Luck M. Understanding agent system. 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer-
V erlag; 2004.
Doyle J, O'Connor D, Reynolds G, Bottomley P . The robustness of the
asymmetrically dominated effect: buying frames, phantom alternatives, and
in-store purchases. Psychol Mark 1999;16:225 –43.
Engel JF, Blackwell RD, Miniard PW. Consumer Behavior. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
The Dryden Press; 1995.
Gardyn R. Oh, the good life. Am Demogr, November 2002;24(10):30 –5.
Grimm V , Revila E, Berger U, Jeltsch F, Mooij WM, Railsback SF, et al. Pattern-
oriented modelling of agent-based complex system: lessons from ecology.
Science 2005;310:987–91.
Gross BD. Complexity science and 21st century issue. Presentation at LSE,
2004; 2004.
Heath TB, Chatterjee S. Asymmetric decoy effects on lower-quality versus
higher-quality brands: meta-analytic and experimental evidence. J Consum
Res 1995;22:411–20.
Highhouse S. Context-dependent selection: the effects of decoy and phantom
job candidates. Org Behav Human Decis Process 1982;65:68 –76.
Huber J, Payne JW, Puto C. Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives:
violations of regularity and the similarity hypothesis. J Consum Res
1982;9:90–8.
Kim B, Blattberg RC, Rossi PE. Modeling the distribution of price
sensitivity and implications for optimal retail pricing. J Bus Econ Stat
1995;13(3):291 –303.
Kivetz R, Netzer O, Srinivasan V . Extending compromise effect models to
complex buying situations and other context effects. J Mark Res
2004;41:262–8.
Makoto M. Forecasting hits in the J-Pop market: a practical application of multi-
agent simulation in Japan. SFI business network: tutorial on complex and
agent based modeling; 2000.
McClelland DC. Human motivation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;
1987.
McFarland DJ. Motivational control systems analysis. London: Academic Press
Inc; 1974.
Min KS. Consumer response to product unavailability. Unpublished PhD
Thesis, the Ohio State University; 2003.
Park J, Kim J. The effects of decoys on preference reversals: the role of perspective
and providing justification. J Consum Psychol 2005;15(2):94–107.
Patel S, Schlijper A. Models of consumer behavior. Report on ESGI 2004; 2004.
Poggi A. Developing real applications with agent technologies. J Syst Integr
1999;9(4):311–28.
Pratkanis AR, Farquhar PH. A brief history of research on phantom alternatives:
evidence for seven empirical generalizations about phantoms. Basic Appl
Soc Psychol 1992;13(1):103 –22.
Quesada J, Chater N, Otto P . An explanation of decoy effects without assuming
numerical attributes. Proceedings of the 27th annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society; 2005.
Rud OP . Data mining cookbook: modeling data for marketing, risk, and
customer relationship management. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc;
2001.
Simonson I. Choice based on reasons: the case of attraction and compromise
effects. J Consum Res 1989;16:158 –74.
Simonson I, Tversky A. Choice in context: tradeoff contrast and extremeness
aversion. J Mark Res 1992;29:281 –95.
Tversky A, Kahneman D. Loss aversion in riskless choice: a reference
dependent model. Q J Econ 1991:1039 –61 (November 1991).
Wedell DH, Pettibone JC. Using judgments to understand decoy effects in
choice. Org Behav Human Decis Process 1996;24:49 –65.
922 T. Zhang, D. Zhang / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 912 –922
