An economic agent-based model of coupled housing and land markets (CHALMS)
Nicholas Magliocca a,⇑, Elena Saﬁrova b, Virginia McConnell a,b, Margaret Walls b
a University of Maryland, Baltimore County, IGERT, 211 Sondhiem Hall, 1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA
b Resources for the Future, 1616 P St. NW, Washington, DC 20036, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 2 June 2010
Received in revised form 24 September
2010
Accepted 15 January 2011
Available online 18 February 2011
Keywords:
Agent-based modeling
Land markets
Housing markets
Price expectations
Coupled markets
Housing density
abstract
This paper describes a spatially disaggregated, economic agent-based model of urban land use, which is
named for its innovative feature of coupled housing and land markets (CHALMS). The three types of
agents—consumer, farmer and developer—all make decisions based on underlying economic principles,
and heterogeneity of both individuals and the landscape is represented. CHALMS simulates the conver-
sion of farmland to housing development over time, through the actions of the agents in the land and
housing markets. Land and building structures in the housing bundle are treated explicitly, so the model
can represent the effects of land and housing prices on housing density over time. We use CHALMS to
simulate the dynamics of land-use changes as a representative suburban area grows. The presence of
agent and landscape heterogeneity, stochastic processes, and path dependence require multiple model
runs, and the expression of spatial dispersion of housing types, overall housing density, and land prices
over time in terms of the most likely, or ‘average’, patterns. We ﬁnd that CHALMS captures both the gen-
eral tendency for diminishing population density at greater distances from the center city, and dispersed
leapfrog patterns of development evident in most suburban areas of the US.
/C2112011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Land-use patterns on the urban fringe emerge from many indi-
vidual landowners’ conversion decisions in response to changing
economic opportunities and landscape features. Given this com-
plexity, land-use change simulation models have become valuable
tools to understand processes of land conversion and development,
and for analyzing the effects of land-use policies. Various modeling
methodologies have been applied by a wide range of disciplines,
such as urban planning, landscape ecology, geography, and eco-
nomics, to build the current understanding of land-use change ( Ir-
win, 2010; Parker, Manson, Janssen, Hoffmann, & Deadman, 2003;
Veldkamp & Verburg, 2004 ).
However, most models represent either spatially detailed devel-
opment patterns or individual-level decision-making—rarely inte-
grating both elements explicitly. For example, models that
provide spatially explicit representations of land-use patterns
may lack an equally rigorous representation of agent decision-
making processes ( Fernandez, Brown, Marans, & Nassauer, 2005;
Parker & Filatova, 2008 ). Models that take into account microeco-
nomic agent decision-making, on the other hand, may fail to cap-
ture the full heterogeneity of those agents and inadequately
describe spatial characteristics of model outcomes ( Irwin, 2010 ).
This paper describes the coupled housing and land markets
model—CHALMS. It is an economic agent-based model (ABM) of
housing and land markets that captures the conversion of farmland
to residential housing of varying densities over time in a hypothet-
ical, growing ex-urban area. The primary goal of this study is to de-
velop some general theoretical insights into the individual-level
processes that drive regional development patterns. CHALMS is un-
ique among ABMs of land-use for its integration of: (1) microeco-
nomic decision-making rules for consumer, farmer, and
developer agents in a spatially explicit framework; (2) representa-
tion of heterogeneous agent characteristics and spatial goods (e.g.
land productivity and housing sizes and densities); and (3) direct
linkages between adaptive price expectations and demand and
supply decisions of developer and farmer agents through housing
and land markets. We demonstrate how patterns in development
density and land prices that are predicted by traditional urban eco-
nomic theory can be reproduced in an ABM framework. In addition,
we show how disconnected, leapfrog development patterns
emerge from the simulation of individual price expectations and
market transactions.
Section 2 reviews the capabilities and limitations of current
land-use modeling approaches, and describes how integrating
the insights from recent economic and non-economic ABMs can
provide a more complete representation of the processes driving
urban growth. Section 3 details the structure of CHALMS, agent
representations, and market interactions. Section 4 presents
baseline results and outcomes of preliminary sensitivity analysis.
0198-9715/$ - see front matter /C2112011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2011.01.002
⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nmag1@umbc.edu (N. Magliocca).
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems
journal homepage: www. elsevier.com/locat e/compenvurbsys

Finally, Section 5 concludes with a discussion of model capabilities
and limitations and directions for future research.
2. Some previous land-use modeling approaches
2.1. Spatial equilibrium economic models
Economic models of urban land use are typically built on the
assumption of spatial equilibrium. These models assume that over
the long run housing rents will reach equilibrium and offset differ-
ences in spatially heterogeneous attributes such as transportation
costs to the central business district (CBD), neighborhood ameni-
ties, and access to employment. Early models in the urban econom-
ics literature used a monocentric city framework in which location
is deﬁned purely by distance to a CBD where all jobs are located
(Alonso, 1964; Mills, 1972; Muth, 1969 ). Decreasing housing rent
and density gradients are a feature of these monocentric models
– i.e., rents and housing density fall as distance to the CBD in-
creases. The basic monocentric framework has been expanded to
incorporate growth and uncertainty, include environmental and
open space amenities, evaluate zoning and other regulations, and
study a variety of other issues ( Capozza & Helsley, 1990; Mills,
1972; Wheaton, 1974 ; Wu & Plantinga, 2003 ). In recent years,
economists have relaxed the monocentricity assumption (e.g.
Epple & Sieg, 1999; Walsh, 2007 ).
Although spatial equilibrium models have many desirable fea-
tures – a rigorous representation of agent behavior and capitaliza-
tion of spatial differences in amenities and other factors into land
values (Irwin, 2010) – several strong assumptions are made to en-
sure analytical tractability. First, spatial equilibrium is a particu-
larly restrictive assumption, because out-of-equilibrium
dynamics, such as path dependence of development location, are
important drivers of urban systems ( Arthur, 2006, Chapter 2;
Brown, Page, Riolo, Zellner, & Rand, 2005; Irwin, 2010; Tesfatsion,
2006, Chapter 16). Second, in order to ensure analytical tractability,
agent heterogeneity is typically quite limited. 1 More detailed dis-
cussions of the limitations of these assumptions are available else-
where for a wide range of applications ( Arthur, 2006, Chapter 2;
Arthur, Durlauf, & Lane, 1997; Axtell, 2005; Kirman, 1992 ; Filatova
et al., 2009 ; Irwin, 2010; Parker & Filatova, 2008; Tesfatsion & Judd,
2006). Since we want to investigate the spatial and temporal dynam-
ics of housing density patterns, a framework that can account for
both agent preferences for spatially heterogeneous goods and idio-
syncratic differences in decision-making processes is necessary. Path
dependence of land-use patterns can then be explicitly linked to
individual-level motivations of land conversion decisions.
2.2. Agent-based models
Agent-based modeling (ABM) has emerged as an alternative
method for modeling urban growth and land-use change. Parker
et al. (2003) provide a detailed review of the different types and
applications of ABMs for modeling land-use change. Although
ABMs differ widely in their focus, assumptions, and formalizations
of agent interactions (e.g. Benenson & Torrens, 2004; Ettema, 2010;
Filatova, Parker, & van der Veen, 2007; Filatova, Parker, & van der
Veen, 2009; Ligtenberg, Wachowicz, Bregt, Beulens, & Kettenis,
2004; McNamara & Werner, 2008; Otter, van der Veen, & de
Vriend, 2001; Parker & Filatova, 2008; Robinson & Brown, 2009 )
they all rely on interactions between many distributed agents to
form emergent larger-scale patterns ( Manson, 2001). Thus, micro-
economic fundamentals can be incorporated into individual
agents’ decision-making rules to simulate emergent trends in a
spatially explicit framework.
However, examples of incorporating microeconomic decision-
making rules into ABMs are few. Filatova et al. (2009) and earlier
papers ( Filatova et al., 2007; Parker & Filatova, 2008 ) present the
fullest, economically-based implementation of an agent-based
land market to date. The authors relax the conventional spatial
equilibrium assumption by explicitly modeling decentralized,
bilateral transactions between land buyers and sellers. Transaction
prices for land are determined by specifying a buyer’s and seller’s
willingness to pay and willingness to accept, respectively, which
are then adjusted to form bid and asking prices accounting for dif-
ferent market power scenarios ( Filatova et al., 2009 ; Parker &
Filatova, 2008 ). The authors have provided valuable insights into
methods for relaxing spatial equilibrium assumptions and incorpo-
rating microeconomic decision-making into the ABM framework.
However, their model lacks a housing market and cannot capture
the feedbacks between land and housing markets that inﬂuence
spatial rent structures.
Ettema (2010) presents an economic ABM of a housing market,
which explicitly simulates relocation and price setting processes.
Housing prices are produced through bilateral transactions be-
tween a buyer and seller, and are constrained by the agents’ per-
ceptions of market conditions and by the buyer’s budget
constraint and housing preferences. The buyer’s opportunity costs
are explicitly considered by comparing utility derived from hous-
ing dwellings available in the current period to the maximum ex-
pected utility of potential housing in the future. Expectation
formation, executed using Bayesian updating, is a key advance
from this model design. However, the expectation formation pro-
cess only accounts for price changes driven by changing consumer
preferences attributed to life cycle effects. For the purposes of sim-
ulating spatially explicit development patterns—which the author
acknowledges is beyond the scope of his current model—the mod-
el’s design cannot accommodate spatial characteristics of housing
goods or the formation of spatially heterogeneous price
expectations.
Robinson and Brown (2009) present a detailed spatial represen-
tation of regional development patterns in a GIS-based ABM
named dynamic ecological exurban development (DEED). Land
and housing markets are integrated by the conversion of farm par-
cels to residential subdivisions of different densities by developers,
and the acquisition of deeds to subdivision lots by residential
household agents. In addition, township agents are able to specify
zoning and land acquisition polices to alter development patterns.
However, land conversion events are not based on microeconomic
decision-making. Farm and residential parcel sales probabilisti-
cally occur on the basis of land or lot characteristics. No markets
are represented in which competing land uses can be valued, and
the economic constraints or opportunity costs of the acting agents
are not considered. Although the authors make a valuable contri-
bution towards empirically grounding ABMs, this approach makes
it difﬁcult to gain general insights into the underlying economic
forces that drive land conversion decisions.
CHALMS builds upon the above ABMs by integrating many of
their innovations into one framework capable of simulating devel-
opment density patterns through coupled housing and land mar-
kets. Similar to Robinson and Brown (2009) , housing and land
markets are linked through the supply and demand functions of
the developer and consumer households, respectively; however,
our agents respond directly to and create market prices subject
to economic constraints. Mechanisms of land and housing transac-
tions in CHALMS are built upon the bilateral transaction frame-
work developed by Parker and Filatova (2008) , but are expanded
to link the developer’s rent expectations in the housing market
to his bid prices in the land market. Price expectations play a
1 Some models include more heterogeneity than others. See, for example, Anas and
Arnott (1991) and Epple and Sieg (1999) for models with heterogeneous consumers.
184 N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191

similar role in CHALMS as they do in Ettema’s model (2010) . Adap-
tive expectations of future prices and market conditions are used
to compare the utility of present and potential future transac-
tions—directly inﬂuencing the timing of transactions. In addition,
our agents’ price expectation models are designed to capture spa-
tially dependent price trends that directly affect the location of
housing and land sales. These advances allow us to investigate
both the supply- and demand-side forces driving spatial patterns
of land conversion and development density over time.
3. Model description
3.1. Model structure
A growing ex-urban area is represented in which land is con-
verted from farming to residential housing of varying densities
over time. Farmland differs randomly in its productive capacity
across farms, and farmers differ in how they form expectations
about future prices of their land. Farmers compare the returns from
farming to expected proﬁt from selling their land to a single repre-
sentative developer and make the decision each period whether to
continue farming or enter the land market. Inequality between
farmers’ total supply and the developer’s demand for land estab-
lishes the bargaining power of farmers, which inﬂuences land
transaction prices.
The developer determines the proﬁtability of different types of
housing that vary by both structure and lot size. He sells a housing
good (i.e. a combination of a given house and lot size) to consumers
who prefer to be close to the urban area to minimize transport
costs, and are differentiated by both income and preferences over
different housing types. CHALMS tracks development over time
incorporating elements of path dependence and stochastic uncer-
tainty that determine spatial development. A schematic of agent
decision-making and market interactions, along with the sequence
of events, is shown in Fig. 1 . Price prediction models for farmers
and the developer are used to form expectations of future land
and housing prices, respectively, and are described in detail in
the Appendix.
3.2. Formation of agent price expectations
3.2.1. 1 Consumer utility, willingness to pay (WTP), and willingness to
bid (WTB)
A consumer c calculates standard Cobb–Douglas utility derived
from the consumption of a general consumption good and a hous-
ing good. Each housing good can be considered a ‘bundle’ of one of
eighteen different housing types, which are distinguished by dif-
ferent combinations of three different house sizes ( h) – 1500,
2000, and 2500 square feet – and six different lot sizes ( l)– 1=4 acre,
½ acre, 1 acre, 2 acre, 5 acre, and 10 acre; these lot and house sizes
are meant to represent a typical ex-urban area. We assume that
consumer c’s utility function has a Cobb–Douglas form:
Uðc; nÞ¼ð Ic /C0 Paskjn /C0 wnÞac h
bc
n lcc
n ; ð1Þ
where Ic is income, Wn is the travel cost from the location of house n
to the CBD, and bc and cc are the consumer’s idiosyncratic prefer-
ences for house and lot sizes, respectively. Pask|n is the developer’s
asking price for house n, which is determined by Eqs. (15) or (16)
below, depending on whether the house is being re-sold or is newly
constructed, respectively (Section 3.4.1).
The WTP of consumer c for any given house n is then equal to
the portion of the consumer’s income he is willing to pay for hous-
ing as given by the Cobb–Douglas structure.
WTPðc; nÞ¼ð Ic /C0 wnÞðbc þ cc Þ; ð2Þ
Although this functional form for the utility function implies
that consumers would pay the same amount for all housing net
of transportation costs, consumers identify the housing option
with the greatest utility and adjust their bids on other houses rel-
ative to this most preferred option. First, the maximum utility pos-
sible across all houses, U/C3 , is found. Holding U/C3 constant for all
housing options, the rent, R/C3 , that would produce the same utility
to the consumer as the most preferred choice (i.e. an optimal rent
such that the consumer would be indifferent among housing op-
tions) is calculated for each housing option.
R/C3 ðc; nÞ¼ Ic /C0 wn /C0 U/C3
h
bc
n lcc
n
 ! 1
ac
; ð3Þ
Second, the difference between the rent being asked by the
developer, Pask|n, and the optimal rent, R/C3 , is used to form a willing-
ness to bid (WTB) from WTP for each house.
WTBðc; nÞ¼ WTPðc; nÞ/C0ð Paskjn /C0 R/C3 ðc; nÞÞ; ð4Þ
Consumers therefore bid more or less than the constant share of
income for housing depending on their income and idiosyncratic
preferences for house and lot size, and on the seller’s asking prices
for the houses actually available at a point in time. It is important
to note that the full heterogeneity of consumer preferences is cap-
tured, and bids reﬂect the relative utility of each housing option
offered.
3.2.2. Developer’s rent and return projections and willingness to pay
(WTP) for land
We assume that the developer uses housing information, such
as incomes and utilities of residents and records of past housing
prices, to form rent expectations, which in reality would be
available from a ‘real estate agent’ or similar source. Housing
Fig. 1. Conceptual map of agent and market interactions in CHALMS. The red numbers indicate the (counter-clockwise) sequence of events within one simulated time period
(t). Agents ( italics) are labeled with the underlying conceptual model that governs their behavior. Inter-temporal processes ( t + 1) shown include updating developer’s rent
prediction models, updating the farmers’ land price prediction models, and exogenous growth of the consumer population. (For interpretation of the references to colour in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191 185

information is recorded in discrete ‘zones’ of ﬁve by ﬁve blocks of
cells, which segment the entire simulated landscape. This informa-
tion includes the average expected rent, lot size, house size, number
of bidders before sale, percent that sale price was above/below the
original asking price, the number of houses of each type in the zone,
and residents’ income and utility levels for all houses in each zone.
For any given house, the developer uses ﬁnancial prediction models
(based on Arthur, 1994 , see Appendix, Eqs. (A.1)–(A.6)) to form a
rent expectation (Rexpt) for that house in t + 1 given past price infor-
mation from the neighboring zones. Based on rent expectations for
existing housing, the developer makes spatially explicit rent projec-
tions for all housing types for all undeveloped cells.
Rent projections are made by one of the three different methods
described below. Projected rents are a combination of weighted lo-
cal and regional (city-wide) rent information. For a given housing
type to be built in a given location, a similar housing type within
a local geographic area provides rent information from which a di-
rect extrapolation can be made based on distance and local price
trends. However when a similar housing type does not occur lo-
cally, the developer must rely on rent prediction methods that
draw from similar housing types in a larger geographic region. In
this ‘regional case’, rent predictions are less direct than in the ‘local
case’. Thus, the appropriate rent projection method is adopted
based on the amount of rent information available in a given area.
For each undeveloped cell, a rent for each housing type is projected
taking into account the distance of the given cell from the CBD and
associated travel costs.
For a given undeveloped cell, the distance to every other grid
cell is calculated and mapped. The speciﬁed parameter, nclose, sets
the number of closest cells to be considered as a local search area
for rent information. Using nclose developed cells, a distance-from-
the-CBD-weighted average rent is calculated for each housing type
present. This subset of local houses, nclose, is the basis of rent pro-
jections so that high demand in particular areas (e.g. due to desir-
able housing types and/or a relative shortage of housing in close
proximity to the CBD) can be capitalized into rents that may ex-
ceed what is predicted based on only the travel cost gradient.
Depending on whether the housing type for which a rent projec-
tion is being made is present in nclose search cells, one of the follow-
ing methods for projecting rent is used:
1. If the housing type for which a projection is made is present in
the n closest cell:
Rlog
projði; ltÞ¼ Rlog
lt /C0 mcðDi /C0 Dlog
lt Þ; ð5Þ
where Rloc
lt is the local distance-weighted average rent for hous-
ing of type lt within the closest developed cells, mc is the travel
cost per cell (converted from $/mile), and Dloc ði; ltÞ is the distance
from the cell i to the closest developed cell of the same housing
type lt.
Rreg
projði; ltÞ¼ Rreg
lt /C0 mcðDi /C0 Dreg
lt Þ; ð6Þ
where Rreg
lt is the regional average rent for housing type lt, Di is
the distance from the CBD of cell i, and Dreg
lt is the average dis-
tance from the CBD of all housing of type lt in the region. The
resulting rent projection is given by:
Rprojði; ltÞ¼ wloc Rloc
projði; ltÞþ wreg Rreg
projði; ltÞ; ð7Þ
where wloc and wreg are local and regional weights of 0.3 and 0.7,
respectively.
2. If the lot type for which a projection is being made is not present
in the n closest cells, but exists somewhere in the city, the rent
projection is solely based on regional rental information and is
given by Eq. (6) for Rreg
projði; ltÞ.
3. If the lot type for which a projection is being made is not present
in the n closest cells, and it does not exist anywhere else in the
city, then rent projections are made based on average utilities:
Rloc
projði; ltÞ¼ Iloc
n /C0 wi /C0 Uloc
n
h
bn lcn
 ! 1
an
; ð8Þ
where Iloc
n is the average income (available from zonal housing infor-
mation, see above in Section 3.2.2) households located in the n clos-
est cells, and Uloc
n is the average utility of households located in the n
closest cells.
Rreg
projði; ltÞ¼ Ireg /C0 wi /C0 Ureg
h
b
lc
/C18/C19 1
a
; ð9Þ
where Ireg and Ureg are the average household income and utility,
respectively, over the entire region. The rent projection for housing
type lt in cell i is then given by Eq. (7).
Based on projected rents, potential returns are calculated for
every housing type in every undeveloped cell by subtracting the
costs of construction and infrastructure ( Table 1 ), which vary by
housing type, and the price of land for the given cell. The maximum
return for each cell is calculated as the housing type with the max-
imum return over all possible housing types (subject to zoning
constraints) for the given cell. Maximum returns are then projected
onto the gridded landscape to be used by the developer to deter-
mine the type and location of housing construction that maximizes
proﬁt across all vacant holdings.
Given the rent projections for every undeveloped cell, the rent
associated with the housing type that produces the maximum re-
turn in each cell i of farm F is speciﬁed as Rmax|i. The developer’s
WTP for a given farm F is the average Rmax|i over the extent of
the farm.
WTPðF; tÞ¼
P
j¼Fi
Rmax jj
AF
; ð10Þ
where AF is the total acreage of farm F.
3.2.3. Formation of farmer’s willingness to accept (WTA)
Farmer expectations of land prices are formed using a randomly
allocated set of twenty prediction models. Each prediction model
uses one of six different methods for forming predictions based
on up to 10 years of past land prices from which to extrapolate
Table 1
Selection of model parameters.
Mean (std. dev) farm size, in acres 128 (70.67)
Mean (std. dev) agricultural return, in $/acre $2486 ($249)
Building cost per square foot $85–$165
Infrastructure costs per housing unit a
One acre lots or smaller $6000–$17,000
2 acre lots $11,000–$20,000
5 + acre lots $13,000–$25,000
Share of income on housing expenditure, ß + c
Low income .35–.42
Middle income .27–.34
High income .18–.26
Proportion of housing expenditure on land, c/(ß + c) .10 –.90
Transportation costs (costs/mile)
Timeb $1.30
Out of pocket ( BTS, 2007 ) $0.54
Exogenous rate of population growth 10%
a Based on from Frank (1989) and Fodor (1997) .
b We assumed time costs to be a function of average road speed (30 mph),
average number of workers per house (2), average wage per person ($30/h), value of
time as a percent of wage (50%), and the road network indirectness coefﬁcient (0.3)
(this is the ratio of network distance to the Euclidian distance).
186 N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191

next period’s price expectation (based on Arthur, 1994, Eqs. (A.1)–
(A.6) in Appendix). A farmer’s decision to sell to a developer or con-
tinue farming is based on the expected return from selling his farm
relative to the value of the farm’s agricultural return per acre in
perpetuity, Vagr. The projected land price for cell i on farm F, PLproj|Fi,
which consists of spatially discounted (Eq. (A.10) in Appendix) and
predicted (Eqs. (A.1)–(A.6) in Appendix) price components, is com-
pared to the farmer’s baseline WTA.
WTAðFi; tÞ¼ maxfPLprojjFi ; VagrjFi g; ð11Þ
The farmer’s WTA is dynamically set to the greater of the two
values. This enables the farmer to capture speculative gains from
sale of his land when development pressure is high, while enforc-
ing a rational threshold below which the farmer would be better-
off farming.
3.3. Land market interactions
3.3.1. Bargaining power
If the developer’s WTP for a given farm is greater than the farm-
er’s WTA for his land, then the two enter into bilateral negotiation
to determine the ﬁnal transaction price of each parcel. Bargaining
power in the land market, e, is adapted from Parker and Filatova
(2008) and captures differences in the developer’s demand for
and the farmers’ supply of land at the initial WTP of the developer.
e ¼ ðdLand /C0 AF/C3 Þ
ðdLand þ AF/C3 Þ ; ð12Þ
where dLand is the acreage demanded by the developer and AF/C3 is the
acreage supplied by participating farmers. F/C3 is the subset of all
farmers for which the condition WTP > WTA is true. If the developer
demands more land than farmers supply, e is positive and farmers
bid above their WTA (Section 3.2.3). If farmers supply more land
than is demanded by the developer, e is negative and the developer
will bid below his initial WTP (Section 3.2.1). Bargaining power is
dynamic because the amount of land supplied by farmers depends
on the initial WTP of the developer. Also, the developer’s WTP for a
given farm depends on the level of rents in the housing market.
Thus, the housing and land markets are explicitly linked.
3.3.2. Formation of farmer’s asking price (P ask|L)
After bargaining power is observed (Section 3.3.1), farmers par-
ticipating in the market ( F/C3 , i.e. WTP > WTA for their farm) form an
asking price in response to market conditions to maximize their
gains from trade ( Parker & Filatova, 2008 ).
PaskjLðF/C3
i ; tÞ¼ maxfWTAðF/C3
i ; tÞ/C3ð 1 þ eÞ; VagrjF/C3
i
g; ð13Þ
The asking price of the market-participating farmer, F/C3
i , is equal
to or greater than the value of his land in agriculture. If the devel-
oper demands more land than farmers supply, each farmer will
mark up his asking price to potentially maximize gains from trade.
3.3.3. Formation of the developer’s bid price (P bid|L)
After bargaining power is observed (Section 3.3.1), the devel-
oper forms a bid price for each farm for which the condition,
WTP > WTA, is true.
PbidjLðF/C3
i ; tÞ¼ minfWTPðF/C3
i ; tÞ/C3ð 1 þ eÞ; WTPðF/C3
i ; tÞg; ð14Þ
The developer’s bid price for the farm of a market-participating
farmer ( F/C3
i ) is equal to or less than his initial WTP for the farm. If
farmers supply more land than the developer demands, the devel-
oper will mark down his bid price for each farm to maximize both
gains from trade and proﬁt from sales of houses in that location.
3.4. Housing market interactions
3.4.1. Formation of asking prices for houses (P ask|H)
Houses enter the housing market as either new construction or
as pre-existing, recently vacated houses. For existing housing, the
asking price equals the developer’s expected rent, which is formed
using the price expectation models described in Section 3.2.2 and
the Appendix (Eqs. (A.1)–(A.6)). For newly constructed houses,
the asking price equals the developer’s projected rent subject to
varying levels of rent information, as described in Section 3.2.2
and speciﬁed by Eqs. (5)–(9).
3.4.2. Housing market competition
The set of houses on which consumer c bids, Hj, are identiﬁed by
the criteria:
fHj 2 Hn : WTBðc; jÞ P PaskjjXlt g; ð15Þ
Consumer c will bid on houses for which his WTB is greater than
or equal to the developer’s asking prices, Pask|j, multiplied by the
bid level, Xlt for housing type lt. The bid level is the running aver-
age percentage that sale prices have been above/below the original
asking prices for houses of type lt in the past.
The housing market competition factor, HMC, describes the
competition for housing each consumer faces in the housing mar-
ket. It is calculated by comparing the number of houses on which
consumer c will bid to the number of other consumers bidding
on the same houses:
HMCc ¼ ðNC /C0 NHÞ
ðNC þ NHÞ ; ð16Þ
where NH is the number of houses in Hj and NC is the number of
other consumers bidding on Hj.
3.4.3. Formation of consumer bidding for housing
After HMC is observed (Eq. (16)), consumer c sets his bid price
for each particular house j in the set Hj in relation to his optimal
rent for that house, R/C3 (c, j), in response to market conditions:
Pbidðc; jÞ¼ R/C3 ðc; jÞþ HMCc ½WTPðcÞ/C0 PaskðjÞ/C138 ; ð17Þ
If HMCc is positive, competition for housing for consumer c is
high and his bids will be set above his optimal rents. If HMCc,i s
negative, competition for housing for consumer c is low and his
bids will be set below the asking prices. If HMCc is zero, the number
of consumers bidding on consumer c’s set of houses is the same as
Fig. 2. Initial landscape conﬁguration. Each colored polygon represents the location
of one of 50 farms. The dark blue semi-circle (top center) represents the initial ‘city’
location. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191 187

the number of houses c is bidding on, and his bids will equal his
optimal rents. The adjustment of consumers’ bid prices in response
to market conditions allows consumers to try to simultaneously
maximize their gains from trade and the likelihood that they will
be the highest bidder.
3.4.4. Rules for matching consumers with houses
After the bidding process is completed, the highest bidder
on each house is identiﬁed. Consumers possessing at least one
‘winning bid’ are put into a subset of ‘winning bidders’. For each
consumer in the set of winning bidders, the set of houses for which
the consumer owns the highest bid is identiﬁed. The consumer’s
utility is recalculated (using Eq. (1)) for each of these houses using
his winning bid instead of the initial asking price. Given these new
levels of utility, the consumer is matched with the house for which
he is the highest bidder and derives the highest utility. Once a con-
sumer is matched with a house, both the consumer and house are
removed from the market. The matching process is reiterated with
the remaining bids (which are kept constant) until all consumers
are matched, all houses are occupied, or all positive bids are
Table 2
Number of lots by type of house/lot combination, at t = 20.
Housing type Lot size (acres) Housing type description Mean number of lots Std. dev. Mean annual rents (2007 $) Std. dev.
1 1=4 acre lots Small house 96 12 8899.29 482.79
2 Medium house 58 46 12186.06 1022,20
3 Large house 128 74 15119.46 1006.69
4 ½ acre lots Small house 175 113 10097.02 1069.66
5 Medium house 180 124 13204.93 1129.09
6 Large house 172 74 16692.85 889.26
7 1 acre lots Small house 506 120 12675.49 497.69
8 Medium house 220 88 15471.26 621.07
9 Large house 163 68 19595.76 676.23
10 2 acre lots Small house 589 104 19794.96 575.73
11 Medium house 375 92 21823.79 544.95
12 Large house 141 34 25719.98 976.22
13 5 acre lots Small house 0 0 – –
14 Medium house 0 0 – –
15 Large house 0 0 – –
16 10 acre lots Small house 40 32 33008.27 4228.99
17 Medium house 36 29 35303.91 3889.41
18 Large house 8 12 34579.29 7626.81
Fig. 3. ‘Average’ development pattern maps for time steps: (a) 5, (b) 10, (c) 15, and (d) 20. Housing types are color-coded from 1 (dark blue) to 18 (dark red).
188 N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191

exhausted. This process ensures consumers are matched to houses
that generate their maximum possible utility levels given compet-
itive bids from other consumers and discrete housing options pro-
vided by the developer.
4. Model experiments
CHALMS was run on an 80 /C2 80 gridded landscape with each
cell representing an acre for a total region of 6400 acres, or 10
square miles. The CBD was set in the middle of the top row at coor-
dinates (1, 40) with an established ex-urban developed area shown
as the dark blue half-moon at the top of Fig. 2 . Although CHALMS
was able to replicate 18 different housing types, where type is de-
ﬁned by lot and housing size, initial development only consisted of
randomly placed housing types 1–12 (see Table 2 for description of
housing types). Fifty farms surrounded the initial development and
are shown as different colored patches in Fig. 2.2 Initially, 334 con-
sumers participated in the housing market, and an exogenous
growth rate of 10 percent a year was assumed. Incomes of incoming
households are assumed to vary from $20,000 for the lowest quintile
to $200,000 for the highest quintile. 3 Travel costs for households
were assumed to depend both on time and monetary costs ( Table 1).
As new households moved to the region, they demanded housing; a
single developer for the region responded by buying land from farm-
ers and building houses. Thus, farmland was gradually converted to
developed uses over time.
CHALMS was run 30 times 4 and each run tracks growth over a
20-year period. Farmers’ locations and agricultural returns were held
constant across all runs, as were the distribution and location of
housing types in the initial city. Draws from income and consumer
preference distributions and the initial assignment of all prediction
models (i.e. for farmers’ price predictions and distance discounting,
and developer’s price predictions) were allowed to vary randomly
across each of the 30 runs. Holding landscape features constant
across runs eliminates sources of geographic variability, while
exploring the effects of path dependence and stochastic processes
on development patterns that result from agent heterogeneity.
Stochastic elements in CHALMS (i.e. random draws from con-
sumer income and preference distributions and assignment of pre-
diction models) limit the insight of any single model realization.
Instead, maps of the most likely, or ‘average’, development pat-
terns were constructed ( Fig. 3a–d ). For each time step displayed,
the development pattern consists only of cells that were developed
above a threshold frequency, which was calibrated to produce an
‘average’ development pattern that closely approximated the cal-
culated average percent-developed area and dispersion across 30
runs. Within each of those cells, the housing type with the highest
probability of occurrence is mapped. In addition, Fig. 4 shows the
probability of development at any density occurring across 30
runs.
4.1. Results
Table 2 provides a description of housing and lot sizes associ-
ated with each housing type, and summary statistics of ﬁnal out-
comes across 30 model runs. Even though the initial landscape
conﬁguration was held constant across runs, the housing types
built across runs showed a good deal of variation. This variation re-
ﬂected the importance of heterogeneity in consumer demand. The
most frequently developed housing types were those with small or
medium sized houses on 1- and 2-acre lots, which were affordable
for most consumers. No 5-acre lots were built over the entire per-
iod, but 10-acre lots show up. The absence of 5-acre lots was due to
the combined effects of high construction costs relative to ex-
pected rents, and the wealthiest consumers demanding houses
on 10-acre lots.
The results exhibit a general development pattern that is con-
sistent with urban economic theory: as shown in Fig. 5 , housing
density tends to decrease, and average lot sizes increase, as dis-
tance from the CBD increases ( Brueckner & Fansler, 1983; Mills,
1972). Also consistent with urban economic theory, land prices
tend to decrease with distance from the CBD ( Fig. 6 ) and increase
over time as population grows and demand for land increases
(Fig. 7 ). The results also show a pattern that is typical of urban
‘‘sprawl’’ ( Fig. 8 ): a divergent relationship over time between the
number of lots and acreage developed ( Heimlich & Anderson,
2001).
In the ﬁrst 5 time steps, development density and location were
primarily driven by consumer demand and relative farm produc-
tivity. From the initial housing stock, consumers generally derived
higher utility from 1- and 2-acre lots than from other lot sizes. This
resulted in strong competition for those housing types and a sub-
sequent bidding up of their rents. Relatively high rent levels
prompted the developer to purchase land and capitalize on the
Fig. 4. Probability of ﬁnal development patterns of any density occurring at t =2 0
across 30 runs. Land that was always developed is color-coded as dark red, while
land that had a low probability of developing is color-coded in dark blue.
Fig. 5. Mean density by zone after 20 time steps. Zones form concentric circles at
equal intervals away from the CBD. Rounded interval values are shown in miles..
2 Colors are used in Fig. 2 to delineate the farms but have no other meaning.
3 These data were based on median household incomes for suburban counties in
the Mid-Atlantic region (Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Virginia) from the
2000 Census. In general, the model is meant to represent a hypothetical community
on the urban fringe in one of these states; we parameterize the model using data from
this region n ¼ z2
a r2
d2
/C16/C17
.
4 Thirty runs were determined to be sufﬁcient sample size as given by for estimates
of mean rents and number of lots ( Table 2 ) at the 95% conﬁdence level.
N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191 189

strong demand for 1- and 2-acre lots. The development pressure
ﬁltered through to the land market, where farmers adjusted their
WTA levels upward attempting to capture gains from sale above
their return from agriculture. This price signal was strongest close
to the initial development, resulting in high land prices that de-
creased with distance. Thus, the ﬁrst farms sold were those with
relatively low asking prices, distant from initial development
(weak price signal) and comparatively low productivity (low initial
asking price). As a result, early development progressed in a ‘leap-
frog’ pattern ( Figs. 3 a and b) with farms far from initial develop-
ment sold ﬁrst. Furthermore, because of strong demand and high
returns net of land prices and construction costs, 1- and 2-acre lots
were built on the ﬁrst farms sold.
As time progressed, increased land prices coupled with con-
sumer demand prompted the construction of houses on compara-
tively small (1-acre or less) or large (10- acre) lot sizes. Rents for
these relatively scarce housing types rose faster than those of other
housing types in the existing housing stock and prompted a shift in
construction. Concurrently, development pressure and land scar-
city drove land prices upward as population growth spurred com-
petition for housing and farmers reacted to an upward trend in
past land prices. Faced with higher asking prices from farmers
and consumer demand for scarce housing options, the developer
shifted lot sizes and location. Generally, smaller lots – i.e., higher
density housing – occurred on expensive land closer to the initial
‘city’, while lower density housing was built on remaining land
far from the initial ‘city’. Spatial and temporal variability around
this general pattern were due to heterogeneity in farmers’ expecta-
tions of selling prices and consumer housing demands and the
resulting proﬁtability in each particular location.
Fig. 4 provides a sense of the probability distribution of spatial
outcomes across model runs. Comparisons between Fig. 3 a and b
and Fig. 4 demonstrate that several farms have a greater than 85
percent probability of being developed early in any given run.
Those farms have relatively poor land and sufﬁciently low expecta-
tions of land prices to prompt early development consistently
across runs. After time step 10, however, the remaining farms
shown as developed in Fig. 3 c and d generally have much lower
probabilities of being developed in any given model run. At this
point in simulations, land prices are determined more by the
agents’ price expectation models than by differences in agricultural
land productivity. Thus, development patterns are less dependent
on landscape features and become more directly inﬂuenced by sto-
chasticity inherent in agents’ price expectation models ( Brown
et al., 2005 ). This leads to increased stochasticity in development
patterns in the last half of simulations.
5. Discussion and conclusions
CHALMS is an ABM of urban growth and land-use that inte-
grates microeconomic fundamentals into a framework capable of
capturing full heterogeneity and spatially explicit development
patterns. Optimizing behavior of heterogeneous consumers, farm-
ers , and a developer, a spatially differentiated landscape, popula-
tion growth, and a variety of housing and lot types are included
as part of the development process. At the same time, bounded
rationality, or the lack of perfect foresight, is assumed on the part
of all agents. We use CHALMS to describe the dynamics of the
development process in a hypothetical ex-urban locale, as well as
the spatial outcomes.
CHALMS as it currently exists has some limitations. The current
version is simulated on a simpliﬁed landscape that lacks natural
features such as water bodies, topography, or soil quality, which
would inﬂuence a particular location’s attractiveness for develop-
ment and/or suitability for agriculture. In the real world, many of
the features that constitute good agricultural land are often favor-
able for development, which compounds their inﬂuence on devel-
opment patterns. In addition, proximity-based valuation of natural
amenities or publicly provided goods by consumers is not repre-
sented, which has been shown to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence develop-
ment patterns ( Filatova et al., 2007 ; Irwin & Bockstael, 2002; Wu
& Plantinga, 2003 ). Future model iterations will incorporate more
detailed natural landscape features and associated proximity-
based valuation to explore their effects on development patterns.
Another limitation is the representation of only one developer.
This was a simpliﬁcation made to ease interpretation of simulated
interactions and outcomes in both the land and housing markets.
The introduction of competition between developers may change
current development patterns. Although incorporating the above
elements into the model’s structure would likely improve its real-
ism, such elements would also add further complexity into an
already complex model. Moreover, the existing framework allows
us to establish baseline development patterns subject to
heterogeneous consumer preferences and incomes and farm
productivity without the added complexity of a more detailed
Fig. 6. Average price of farmland sold for development over 30 runs, at any time
step, as a function of distance from the CBD.
Fig. 7. Average price of farmland sold for development over 30 runs in each time
period.
Fig. 8. Comparison of number of lots versus acreage developed over time.
190 N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191

landscape. Thus, further testing of model sensitivities and out-
comes will take priority before additional landscape features are
introduced.
Our results demonstrate qualitative behaviors consistent with
urban economic theory that emerge from explicitly coupling hous-
ing and land markets in the ABM framework. The interplay be-
tween markets and agents’ heterogeneous preferences and
perceptions reproduces many trends predicted by conventional ur-
ban economic models but also shows a dispersed, ‘‘leapfrog’’ devel-
opment pattern that is common in ex-urban areas. This has three
important implications. First, CHALMS demonstrates that housing
and land markets inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by one another.
Thus, simulating feedbacks that emerge between markets is critical
for understanding the forces that drive urban growth patterns. Sec-
ond, our formalization of economic agents shows that microeco-
nomic decision-making can be incorporated into an ABM
framework to reproduce regional patterns consistent with those
produced by conventional spatial equilibrium approaches. Finally,
by simulating urban growth from the ‘bottom-up’, ABMs allow
the researcher to represent full agent and environment heteroge-
neity and build an individual-level understanding of the dynamics
of growing urban systems—a combination of advantages unique to
the agent-based modeling approach.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a US Environmental Protection
Agency Science to Achieve Results (STAR) grant to Resources for
the Future. Partial support of the ﬁrst author was provided by
the National Science Foundation (NSF Integrative Graduate Educa-
tion and Research Traineeship (IGERT) ’Water inthe Urban Environ-
ment’ program (Grant No. 0549469) as an UMBC IGERT trainee.
Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary material provides more detailed descriptions of
agents’ price expectation models and the ’housing market compe-
tition factor’ associated with this article can be found, in the online
version, at doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2011.01.002.
References
Alonso, W. (1964). Location and land use . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Anas, A., & Arnott, R. J. (1991). Dynamic housing market equilibrium with taste
heterogeneity, idiosyncratic perfect foresight, and stock conversions. Journal of
Housing Economics, 1 , 2–32.
Arthur, W. B. (1994). The El Farol Problem. In Amer. Econ. Assoc. Papers and Proc.
(Vol. 84, p. 406).
Arthur, W. B. (2006). Out-of-equilibrium economics and agent-based modeling. In L.
Tesfatsion & K. L. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of computational economics: Agent-based
computational economics (pp. 1551–1564). Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V..
Arthur, W. B., Durlauf, S. N., & Lane, D. (1997). The economy as an evolving complex
system II. Santa Fe institute studies in the science of complexity (XXVII) . Wesley:
Addison.
Axtell, R. (2005). The complexity of exchange. Economic Journal, 115 (504),
F193–F210.
Benenson, I., & Torrens, P. (2004). Geosimulation: Automata-based modeling of urban
phenomena. London: John Wiley and Sons.
Brown, D. G., Page, S., Riolo, R., Zellner, M., & Rand, W. (2005). Path dependence and
the validation of agent-based spatial models of land use. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 19 (2), 153–174.
Brueckner, J., & Fansler, D. (1983). The economics of urban sprawl: Theory and
evidence on the spatial sizes of cities. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
65(3), 479–482.
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (2007). Average cost of owning and operating
an automobilea (assuming 15,000 vehicle-miles per year. Research and
Innovative Technology Administration . <www.bts.gov/publications/national_
transportation_statistics/html/table_03_14.html>.
Capozza, D., & Helsley, R. (1990). The stochastic city. Journal of Urban Economics,
28(2), 187–203.
Epple, D., & Sieg, H. (1999). Estimating equilibrium models of local jurisdictions.
Journal of Political Economy, 107 (4), 645–681.
Ettema, D. (2010). A multi-agent model of urban processes: Modeling relocation
processes and price setting in housing markets. Computers, Environment, and
Urban Systems, 35 (1), 1–11.
Fernandez, L. E., Brown, D. G., Marans, R. W., & Nassauer, J. I. (2005). Characterizing
location preferences in an exurban population: Implications for agent-based
modeling. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 32 (6), 799–820.
Filatova, T., Parker, D. C., & van der Veen, A. (2007). Agent-based land markets:
Heterogeneous agents, land prices, and urban land use change. Proceedings of
the 4th conference of the European social simulation associations (ESSA’07),
Toulouse, France.
Filatova, T., Parker, D. C., & van derVeen, A. (2009). Agent-based urban land markets:
Agent’s pricing behavior, land prices and urban land use change. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 12(13). <http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/12/
1/3.html>.
Fodor, E. (1997). The real cost of growth in Oregon. Population and Environment,
18(4).
Frank, J. E. (1989). The costs of alternative development patterns: A review of the
literature. Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute.
Heimlich, R., & Anderson, W. (2001). Development at the urban fringe and beyond:
Impacts on agriculture and rural land. Economic Research Service, US
Department of Agriculture. Agricultural Economic Report No. 803.
Irwin, E. (2010). New directions for urban economic models of land use change:
Incorporating spatial heterogeneity and transitional dynamics. Journal of
Regional Science, 50 (1), 65–91.
Irwin, E., & Bockstael, N. (2002). Interacting agents, spatial externalities, and the
evolution of residential land use patterns. Journal of Economic Geography, 2 ,
31–54.
Kirman, A. P. (1992). Whom or what does the representative individual represent?
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6 (2), 117–136.
Ligtenberg, A., Wachowicz, M., Bregt, A. K., Beulens, A., & Kettenis, D. L. (2004). A
design and application of a multi-agent system for simulation of multi-actor
spatial planning. Journal of Environmental Management, 72 , 43–55.
Manson, S. M. (2001). Simplifying complexity: A review of complexity theory.
Geoforum, 32 , 405–415.
McNamara, D. E., & Werner, B. T. (2008). Coupled barrier island–resort model: 1.
Emergent instabilities induced by strong human–landscape interactions.
Journal of Geophysical Research – Earth Surface, 113 (F1), F01016.
Mills, E. S. (1972). Urban economics . Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.
Muth, R. F. (1969). Cities and housing . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Otter, H. S., van der Veen, A., & de Vriend, H. J. (2001). ABLOoM: Location behavior,
spatial patterns, and agent-based modeling. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and
Social Simulation 4(4)2. <http://www.soc.surrey.ac.uk/jasss/4/4/2.html>.
Parker, D. C., & Filatova, T. (2008). A conceptual design for a bilateral agent-based
land market with heterogeneous economic agents. Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems, 32 , 454–463.
Parker, D. C., Manson, S. M., Janssen, M. A., Hoffmann, M., & Deadman, P. (2003).
Multi-agent systems for the simulation of land-use and land-cover change: A
review. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 93 (2), 314–337.
Robinson, D. T., & Brown, D. G. (2009). Evaluating the effects of land-use
development policies on ex-urban forest cover: An integrated agent-based
GIS approach. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23 (9),
1211–1232.
Tesfatsion, L. (2006). Agent-based computational economics: A constructive
approach to economic theory. In L. Tesfatsion & K. L. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of
computational economics: Agent-Based computational economics (II)
(pp. 831–880). Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V..
Tesfatsion, L., & Judd, K. L. (2006). Handbook of computational economics: Agent-
based computational economics (II) . Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V..
Veldkamp, A., & Verburg, P. H. (2004). Modelling land use change and
environmental impact. Journal of Environmental Management, 72 , 1–3.
Walsh, R. (2007). Endogenous open space amenities in a locational equilibrium.
Journal of Urban Economics, 61 , 319–344.
Wheaton, William. C. (1974). A comparative static analysis of urban spatial
structure. Journal of Economic Theory, 9 , 223–237.
Wu, J., & Plantinga, A. J. (2003). The inﬂuence of public open space of urban
spatial structure. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 46 (2),
288–309.
N. Magliocca et al. / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 35 (2011) 183–191 191
