250 IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 13, No. 1, February 1998 
AUCTION ~AR~ET ~IMUL~TOR FO 
Jayant Kumar Gerald SheblC 
Student Member Senior Member 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Iowa State University 
Ames, IA 50011 
Abstract : Through the passage of new public 
utility regulatory policies, the Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission (FERC) encourages an open 
previous paper describes a framework for price based 
operation and the associated technical issues in an 
auction market structure. This paper presents an 
auction market simulator to experimentally study 
the aspects of power system operation in price- 
based environment. The proposed simulator can 
also be used as a tool to train the system operators 
how to perform electric power transaction in the 
deregulated environment. This paper presents the 
simulation results of auction market for price based 
operation in the 24-bus, 10-generator IEEE 
Reliability Test System. 
market system for price based operation. A 
Keywords : Brokerage system, Auction market, Decision 
analysis, Price based operation, electric power commodity, 
futures and options 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Through the passage of new public utility regulatory policies, 
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) encourages an 
open market system. The basic premise of the regulatory policies 
is to create a competitive environment where generation and 
transmission services are bought and sold under demand and 
supply market conditions. The open market system will consist 
of generation companies (GENCOs), distribution companies 
(DISCOS), transmission companies (TRANSCOs) and independent 
contract administrator (ICA) [1,2]. The interconnection between 
these groups is shown in Figure 1. The ICA is independent and 
disassociated agent for market participants and hence, is assumed 
to be the auctioneer in the electric marketplace. 
A thorough discussion of a price based operation in an auction 
market structure is presented in reference [3]. Reference [5] 
presents a model for energy brokerage/auction system with reserve 
margin and transmission losses. This paper uses the described 
framework in reference [3] and the proposed model in reference [5] 
to develop an auction market simulator. The developed simulator 
scheme is used to simulate auction market in the 24-bus, 10- 
generator IEEE Reliability Test System [41. 
In this work, we concentrate on the electric power auction in 
forward market and futures market The financial drain inflicted on 
traders when hedging their operations in the futures market is 
slightly higher than the one inflected through direct placement in 
the forward market. Hence, an optimal mix of futures 
commitments and forward contracts is difficult to assess and 
depends on hedging, constraints imposed by different contracts, 
and cost of different contracts This paper presents an approach to 
allocate and implement the future contract commitments via 
forward market simulation. The proposed approach is based on a 
linear programming formulation This formulation can easily be 
extended to include stochastic variables, such as fluctuating 
market prices by using decision analysis methodology [6] 
There are many technical and legal problems need to be 
resolved for the suggested industry transition to be successful [3] 
The proposed simulator can be used to address such problems, at 
least in part. The issues, such as pricing of transmission losses, 
priority of transactions, emergency power, etc. can be studied and 
analyzed by experimental simulation of electric market. The 
ultimate goal of the developed simulator is to discover the 
problems associated with the new environment via 
computer/operator simulation instead of using the actual power 
grid. 
In the new environment, the system operators are requred to 
submit the pnce-based bids to perform electric power transaction 
This is quite different from what the system operators are 
accustomed in a vertically integrated industry. The proposed 
simulator can be used to train the operators how to bid in the new 
environment. 
The second section of this paper explains the auction market 
structure. The third section explains a complete scheme for 
auction market simulator. The simulation results are reported in 
the fourth section. The fifth section concludes the paper wlth 
analytical comments 
Figure 1. New business environment 
II. AUCTION MARKET STRUCTURE 
PE-751 -PWRS-0-05-1997 A paper recommended and approved by Auction market structure can be thought of as a computerized 
the lEEE Power System Operations Committee of the IEEE Power market as shown in Figure 2. Each of the players has a terminal 
Engineering Society for publication in the IEEE Transactions on power (PC, workstation, etc.) connected to an auctioneer (auction 
Systems Manuscript submitted December 10, 1996; made available for mechanism) and a contract evaluator. Players generate bids (buy 
printing May 15, 1997. and sell) and submit the quotation to the auctioneer. A bid is a 
specified amount of electricity at a given price. The auctioneer 
binds. bids (matching buyers and sellers) subject to approval of the 
contract evaluation. 
0885-8950/98/$10.00 0 1997 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:55:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

251 
D. Planning Market 
Auction Mechanism 
Evaluation 
I I I I I I 
Figure 2. Computerized market 
Note that most of the authors previous work [7,8,9,10,11,12] 
has dealt with multi-lateral contracts (multiple buyers and sellers) 
to maximize the number of bid awards for each time period of bid 
matching. This can be shown to be equivalent to the pool 
operating convention used in the vertically integrated business 
environment. 
The major trading objectives in the auction market are 
hedging, speculation, and arbitrage. Hedging is a defense 
mechanism against loss and/or supply shortages. Speculation is 
assuming an investment risk with a chance for profit. Arbitrage is 
the crossing of sales (purchases) between the markets. This paper 
assumes that there are four markets commonly operated: cash, 
futures, planning and swaps as shown in Figure 3. 
A. Cash Market 
The two contracts normally traded in cash markets are spot and 
forward. The spot contracts reflects the current price of 
transactions. The forward contracts reflect future system 
conditions. Transactions are executed immediately for spot 
contracts. In the forward market, prices are determined at the time 
of contract but the transactions occur at some future time. The 
auction mechanism for cash market is developed in the reference 
PI. 
B. Futures Market 
A futures market is a place where buyers and sellers can meet 
readily. A futures market creates competition because it unifies 
diverse and scattered local markets and stabilizes prices. The 
contracts in futures market are risky because price movements over 
time can result in large gains or losses. There is a link between 
cash market and futures market which allows price volatility. 
The components of futures contract include trading unit, 
trading hours, trading months, price quotation, minimum price 
fluctuation, maximum daily price fluctuation, last trading day, 
exercise of options, option strike prices, delivery, delivery 
period, alternate delivery procedure, exchange of futures for, or in 
connection with physicals, quality specifications, customer 
margin requirements. Note that delivery, delivery period, 
alternative delivery procedure, and quality specifications would 
have to be specified in greater detail than when the industry was 
vertically integrated. 
C. Swap Market 
In the swap market, contract position can be closed with an 
exchange of physical or financial substitutions, The trader can 
find another trader who will accept (make) delivery and end the 
compensated through a price discount or a premium relative to the 
going price. 
trader’s delivery obligation. The acceptor of the obligation is 
The growth of transmission grid requires transmission companies 
to make contracts based on the expected usage to finance projects. 
The planning market would underwrite the usage of equipment 
subject to the long term commitments to which distribution and 
generation companies ax bound by the rules of network 
expansion to maintain a fair market place. 
Time Line into Future 
Bids Bids Bids b 
Market 
Cash 
Market 
Genco 
Bids Bids 
Figure 3. Electric market 
IlI. THE AUCTION MARKET SIMULATOR 
The proposed simulator allows the implementation of futures 
contracts via forward market simulation. The simulator is 
developed on the assumptions below; however, the approach 
descrlbed in this paper is flexible enough to allow these 
assumptions to be modified if desired. 
A. Assumptions 
1. The futures market is a monthly market up to 18 months. The 
forward market is an hourly market for a 1 month period. Figure 4 
explicitly depicts this time horizon of the different markets. 
w++p++...[... I... 
M1 M2 
L . 
L 
Mx - xth month 
FUM - Future Market 
FOM - Forward Market 
5gure 4. Time horizon of forward and futures market 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:55:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

252 
2. The players are obligated to settle futures contracts in on-peak 
periods of weekdays via forward market. The allocation of futures 
contracts in forward market simulation is shown in Figure 5. 
- M1 
---------)I FMS 
- FCA Y 
FMS 3i 
* 
M2 
-1 
"1 FMS 
FCA 
Figure 5. Market simulation and futures contract allocation 
3 The overall process of forward market simulation consists of 
periodic bid development by GENCOs and DISCOs followed by bid 
matching by auctioneer. This process is repeated several times 
until the price discovery has occurred in the auction market place 
The price discovery is defined as the cycle at which the amount of 
binding contract exceeds a set minimum percentage value. The 
contracts established at the price discovery cycle IS defined as the 
closing contract The overall auction process cycle is shown in 
Figure 6 Thus, the major elements of auction market are (I) rules 
defining the auction mechanism and contract evaluation, (2) 
information available to the market players, (3) GENCO bids, and 
(4) disco bids. 
I Auction Mechanism I 
Genco bids 
4 Disco bids 
Auction evaluation 
Figure 6. Auction cycle 
B. Rules 
1 The auctioneer will establish interchange achedules between 
the participating players on hourly basis by using the model 
developed in reference [SI.. 
2. The bidding process is performed a fixed number of times 
within an hour. The auctioneer may decide when the last bids are 
binding to allow price discovery to occur without excessive 
gaming of the market. The players do not know which bid will be 
binding until the auctioneer declares such conditions. However, 
they do know that there is a maximum number of trials per bidding 
period. The auctioneer may start another round of bidding if any of 
the parties wish to bid. 
3. A bid is a specified amount of electricity at a given price 
Hence, the players should come up with the pricc of elcctricity for 
the amount they wish to transact (price per block for a given 
number of blocks). 
4. The players are obligated to buy or sell the binding bids 
declared by the auctioneer. Hence, all local operational 
constraints ( such as ramp rate constraint, emission constraint, 
fuel constraints, minimum down times, minimum up times, start- 
up procedure curves, etc.) must be considered by the players while 
generating bids for the next trading session or round 
C. Information Available 
The auctioneer would post following information on an 
electronic bulletin accessible to all agents. 
(1) High bid 
(3) Low bid 
(2) Average bid 
(4) Bids accepted 
A chronicle of the above mentioned information would 
describe the trend of the auction market. The trend analysis may 
be used to explain the expected behavior of players. 
D. GENCO Bids 
GENCOs would develop bids primarily based on the plant IiO 
cuive. Typically, the incremental cost curve (ICC) of a power 
plant is monotonically increasing. A piece wise lineal ICC is 
shown in Figure 7. In order to develop a bid, GENCOs need to 
construct the curve illustrated in the Figure Most of the ICCs are 
flatter in the lower range of operating points as opposed to much 
more steeper in the higher range. Thus, more discretizing 
segments are needed as one moves to higher range of operating 
points for block bidding 
It is very evident that the GENCOs need to generate their ICC 
accurately. All local constraints such as fuel constraints, 
emission constraints, and ramp rate constraints must be included 
in the optimization problem. Moreover, the bid development 
should be done by using not only the incremental cost curve, but 
also by deciding business strategies with due consideration to 
moves made by the other players in market place. Information 
posted on the electronic bulletin should be properly used to do a 
trend analysis and to conjecture performance of other agents. 
E. Disco Bids 
DISCOs would develop bids primarily based on their decremental 
revenue curve (DRC) as shown in Figure 8. At present, the concept 
of DRC is not very prevalent. But in the future, DISCOs would 
have to use strategies based on their DRCs to operate efficiently. 
There are two major components that would affect the decremental 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:55:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

253 
revenue curve, (a) Delay Scheduling curve [ 131 and (b) interruptible 
and curtailable rate programs [14]. 
I 
I 
50 100 175 225250 
Figure 7. GENCO bids at different operating points 
Profile controlled by 
techniques of efficient 
rationing among the 
customers 
UMW A 
10.27 
13.44 
9.56 
- - . - +-- 
MW 
200 400 575 850 
Figure 8. Disco bids at different operating points 
The most important element that affects the deceremental 
revenue curve is the ability to shift the load through different time 
periods to maximize the overall profit in procurement and delivery 
[13]. This optimization problem can be solved by dynamic 
programming using any combination of the following: (a) Self 
generation, (b) Storage (cold water, SMES, etc.), and (c) Demand 
side management (DSM by moving load and losing some). Under 
interruptible and curtailable rate programs, a disco offers a bill 
discount to the participating customers in the exchange for the 
right to curtail their service under prescribed conditions within 
prespecified monthly frequency of intermptions. 
F. Allocation of futures contracr 
This work assumes that the market players are obligated to 
fulfill the commitments of futures contracts similar to take-or-pay 
fuel contracts. The futures contract should be modeled as a separate 
unit (a generator unit for genco or a load unit for disco) of zero cost 
in the short term scheduling problem. The basic framework of 
allocation of futures contract among the on-peak periods of a 
given month can be given as a profit maximization problem as 
given below: 
Maximize: 
Subject to: 
smax 
''S F'auailable 
s= 1 
' 0 
FCavailable 
FGmax 
0 
Pgimin 
0 
Pgimax 
= Expected price in the sth period 
= Power generation for futures contract in the 
= Power generation by ith unit in the sth 
= Cost of production of power generation by 
= The unsettled amount of futures contract 
= Maximum allowable settlement of futures 
= Bidding limit for minimum generation of 
= Bidding limit for maximum generation of 
sth period 
period 
ith uinit in the sth period 
contract in one on-peak period 
the ith unit 
the ith unit 
smax = The maximum number of periods in a given 
Ramp,, 
forward market simulation. 
ith unit 
= Minimum up/down time ramping limit of the 
The first and second term of objective function (equation (1)) 
are the total revenue generated and the cost of production 
respectively. Thus, the objective is to maximize the profit for a 
given time horizon. Equations (2) and (3) are futures contract 
allocation constraints. Equations (4) and (5) are bidding 
constraints for minimum and maximum generation capacity limits 
respectively. Equation (6) is operational constraint for minimum 
up and down time ramping limits. 
An equivalent formulation can be used by DISCOs to solve the 
futures contract allocation problem. The operational constraints 
of specific units (such as hydro generation) should be included in 
the overall profit maximi:zation problem. The aforementioned 
framework can be easily modified to accommodate such needs. 
G. The overall scheme for auction market simulator 
The overall scheme for auction market simulator is described 
in Figure 9. Initialization i,s done on the basis of operating point 
and contract agreements. The auction mechanism developed in 
reference [5] is used to match the submitted bids by the players. 
The players use future contracts in generating bids to maximize 
profit by using formulation given in equations (1) - (6). The 
auctioneer ensures that the current day futures contract allocation 
is feasible, and then simulates the forward market for the current 
month. The auction cycle proceeds until the price discovery 
occurs. The convergence in forward market is defined as the 
auction cycle in which the number of closing contracts (as defined 
earlier) in different periods exceed a set minimum percentage 
value. At each convergence, the operating points are updated in 
accordance with the established contracts and the simulation 
proceeds for the next day. 
IV, SIMULATION FSiSULTS 
We have developed an auction market simulator far a IO- 
generator, 24-bus IEEE RTS system. The test system data has been 
taken from the report prepared by the IEEE PES Reliability Test 
System Task Force [4]. For simulation purpose, the test system 
was divided into the 5 GENCOs and 5 DISCOS. The 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:55:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

254 
correspondence of the test system with RTS test system is 
described in Table 1. 
The cost functions of GENCOs are assumed to be quadratic curves 
of the form: a + b*p + c*p2. . The cost curve data for the 
generating units of the test system are given in appendix. 
Revenue curves of DISCOs are also modeled as quadratic curves. 
However, in this example, these curves are generated such that the 
data allows enough consumer surplus for facilitating the trade 
game The data related to DISCOs are not shown in this paper. 
This approach provides a basis of comparison between auction 
market outcome and the conventional pool dispatch. 
Genco 
Table 1. Genco and Disco Buses in IEEE RTS-96 
Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 
Mw Mw Mw 
Incremental cost curve 
Decremental revenue curve 
Future contract agreements 
Figure 9. The overall scheme for auction market simulator 
An example of 3 period simulation of forward auction market is 
used to illustrate the power transaction in the proposed framework. 
Hydro units being the cheapest always enter the basis of the 
proposed LP model. Hence, they are ignored for this simulation 
example. Table 2 shows the future contract agreements of the 
GENCOs. Initial operating points of various units for the three 
periods are shown in Table 3. 
4 I 45 I 
Table 3. Initial operating points of units in RTS 
I Generator I Period 1 I Period 2 I Period 3 I 
The simulation process for the agents follow a two step 
procedure at every auction cycle. First, the futures contract 
amounts are allocated among the periods by using the 
deterministic formulation as descnbed in earlier section . The 
price estimates are generated by a multiarea economic dispatch 
program. At the second step, the agents update their operating 
points based on the accepted futures contracts. Then, the bids are 
generated on the basis of operating points and desired profits. 
Using these bids, the overall process of auction market simulation 
for the 3-period is implemented. The simulation results are 
summarized in Table 4, 5 and 6. 
Note that the market clearing price is higher than the lambda 
pool dispatch. This is due to high value of disco bids originally 
designed to have enough consumer surplus in the system data. 
Hence, this should not be confused with the high price of 
transaction. The intent of this example is to show the overall 
process. The similarity of the proposed approach with the 
conventional pool dispatch is recognized by observing that all 
the market clearing prices are correlated with system lambda. 
Market clearing prices are in the range of 5 to 15% above the value 
of system lambda due to randomization in profit desired by the 
market agents 
V CONCLUSION 
We have developed an auction market simulator for price based 
operation. The proposed approach allows the implementation of 
futures contract via forward market simulation. This simulator can 
be used to experimentally study various aspects of the deregulated 
environment. The proposed simulator can also be used to explain 
the price-based bidding to the system operators. 
The proposed simulation model provides a single central 
entity, the ICA responsible for merchandising as well as technical 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:55:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

255 
7. G. Fahd, D.A. Richards, and G.B. Sheble’, “The 
Implementation Of An Energy Brokerage System Using Linear 
Programming”, IEEE Trans. on power systems, vo1.7, no.1, pp. 
8 G. Fahd, and G.B. Sheble’, “Optimal Power Flow Emulation 
Of Interchange Brokerage System Using Linear Programming”, 
IEEE Trans. on power systems, vo1.7, no.2, pp. 497-504, 1992. 
9. D. Anwar, and G.B. Sheble’, “Application Of Optimal 
Power Flow To Interchange Brokerage Transaction”, Electric 
Power System Research Journal, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 83-90, 1995. 
10. D. Post, S.S. Coppinger, and G.B.Sheble’, “Application 
Of Auctions As A Pricing Mechanism For The Interchange Of 
Electric Power”, IEEE Trims. on power systems, vol.10, no.3, pp. 
11. J. Kumar, K.H. Ng, and G.B. Sheble’, “AGC Simulator 
For Price Based Operation Part I: A Model”, accepted and to be 
presented at IEEE PES summer meeting, 96 SM 588-4 PWRS, 
1996. 
12. J. Kumar, K.H. Ng, and G.B. Sheble’, “AGC Simulator 
For Price Based Operation. Part 11: Case Study Results”, accepted 
and to be presented at IEEE PES summer meeting, 96 SM 373-1 
PWRS, 1996. 
13. J. Kumar, and G.B. Sheble’, “Auction Game In Electric 
Marketplace”, In the proceedings of 58thAmerican Power 
Conference, Chicago, 11, 1996, pp. 356-364. 
14. H.P. Chao, “Peak: Load Pricing And Capacity Planning 
With Demand And Supply Uncertainty”, Bell Journal of 
Economics, vol. 14, no.1, 1983, pp. 179-190. 
90 - 96, 1991. 
1580 - 1584, 1995. 
Jayant Kumar received his B. E. in Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering from Birla Institute of Technology, 
Ranchi, (India) and MSEE from Iowa State University. His 
interests include economics of power system operation, artificial 
neural networks and optimization theory. 
Gerald B. Sheble (M 71, SM 85 ) is a Professor of 
Electrical Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa. His 
research interests include plower system optimization, scheduling 
and artificial life techniques. 
VLI APPENDIX 
Generator Period 1 Period 2 
type - (MW) (MW) 
functions. This will facilitate the bidding process as the bids are 
directly evaluated in conjunction with the operating conditions 
and constraints. The issue of acceptance and rejection of bids is 
resolved disregarding the order of transactions. This is one of the 
key feature of the model which will reduce the legalities involved 
in real-time implementation of a deregulated market operation. 
Furthermore, the practical implementation of the proposed model 
will reduce burden on the communication requirement. This is 
highly desirable due to intensive communication needs arising 
from the increased number of transactions in the new marketplace. 
Period 3 
(MW) 
9.63 9.39 
Table 6. Transaction parameters 
8.97 
Transaction 
Datameters 
292.06 
285.88 
6.17 
Market Clearing 
Price ($/MW) 
360.81 314.60 
353.46 304.33 
7.35 10.26 
Lambda for Pool 
dispatch 
($/MW) 
Total amount of 
sell bids 
accepted 
Total amount of 
buy bids 
accepted 
Transmission 
losses due to 
transactions 
(MW) 
VI. REFERENCES 
1. Federal Energy Regulatory commission, “Notice Of 
Proposed Rulemaking: Docket No. RM93-3”, Congressional 
Record, July 30, 1993. 
2. Federal Energy Regulatory commission, “Notice Of 
Proposed Rulemaking: Docket No. RM95-8-000”, Congressional 
Record, March 29, 1995. 
3. G.B. Sheble’, “Price Based Operation In An Auction 
Market Structure”, presented at IEEE PES Winter Meeting, 96 WM 
4.. IEEE Power System Reliability Subcommittee, 
“Reliability Test System”, presented at IEEE PES Winter Meeting, 
96 WM 183-7 PWRS, 1996. 
brokerage system with reserve margin and transmission losses”, 
to be presented at the IEEE PES winter meeting, 96 WM 190-9 
PWRS, 1996. 
6. R A Howard, “ Decision Analysis: Practice And Promise” 
Management Science, 1988: 679- 675. 
191-7 PWRS, 1996. 
5 J Kumar. and GB Shehle’ “Framework for energy 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:55:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
