Eur. Phys. J. B 31, 421–437 (2003)
DOI: 10.1140/epjb/e2003-00050-6
 THE EUROPEAN
PHYSICALJOURNALB
Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market
models
I. Giardina1,2,a and J.-P. Bouchaud3,4
1 S e r v i c ed eP h y s i q u eT h ´eorique, Centre d’´etudes de Saclay, Orme des Merisiers, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
2 Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`ad iR o m aL aS a p i e n z aa n dC e n t e rf o rS t a t i s t i c a lM e c h a n i c sa n dC o m p l e x i t y ,
INFM Roma La Sapienza, Piazzale Aldo Moro 2, 00185 Roma, Italy
3 S e r v i c ed eP h y s i q u ed el ’´Etat Condens´e, Centre d’´etudes de Saclay, Orme des Merisiers, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
4 Science & Finance, CFM, 109-111 rue Victor-Hugo, 92532 Levallois Cedex, France
Received 5 July 2002 / Received in ﬁnal form 9 December 2002
Published online 14 February 2003 – c© EDP Sciences, Societ`a Italiana di Fisica, Springer-Verlag 2003
Abstract. We deﬁne and study a rather complex market model, inspired from the Santa Fe artiﬁcial market
and the Minority Game. Agents have diﬀerent strategies among which they can choose, according to their
relative proﬁtability, with the possibility of not participating to the market. The price is updated according
to the excess demand, and the wealth of the agents is properly accounted for. Only two parameters play
a signiﬁcant role: one describes the impact of trading on the price, and the other describes the propensity
of agents to be trend following or contrarian. We observe three diﬀerent regimes, depending on the value
of these two parameters: an oscillating phase with bubbles and crashes, an intermittent phase and a stable
‘rational’ market phase. The statistics of price changes in the intermittent phase resembles that of real
price changes, with small linear correlations, fat tails and long range volatility clustering. We discuss how
the time dependence of these two parameters spontaneously drives the system in the intermittent region.
We analyze quantitatively the temporal correlation of activity in the intermittent phase, and show that the
‘random time strategy shift’ mechanism that we proposed earlier allows one to understand the observed
long ranged correlations. Other mechanisms leading to long ranged correlations are also reviewed. We
discuss several other issues, such as the formation of bubbles and crashes, the inﬂuence of transaction costs
and the distribution of agents wealth.
PACS. 89.65.Gh Economics, business, and ﬁnancial markets
1 Introduction
It is now well known that the statistics of price changes in
ﬁnancial markets exhibit interesting ‘stylized facts’, which
are to some extent universal, i.e. independent of the type
of market (stocks, currencies, interest rates, etc.) and of
the epoch [1–4]. Price changes are in a good approxi-
mation uncorrelated beyond a time scale of the order of
tens of minutes (on liquid markets). Their distribution
is strongly non Gaussian: they can be characterized by
Pareto (power-law) tails with an exponent in the range
3−5. Another striking feature is the intermittent nature
of the ﬂuctuations: localized outbursts of the volatility,i.e.
the amplitude of the price ﬂuctuations (averaged over a
given time interval), can be identiﬁed. This fact, known as
volatility clustering [2,3,5,6], can be analyzed more quan-
titatively: the temporal correlation function of the daily
volatility σt c a nb eﬁ t t e db ya ni n v e r s ep o w e ro ft h el a gτ,
with a rather small exponent in the range 0.1 −0.3 [6–10].
a e-mail: irene.giardina@roma1.infn.it
This suggests that there is no characteristic time scale for
volatility ﬂuctuations: outbursts of market activity can
persist for short times (a few hours), but also for much
longer times, months or even years. The slow decay of
the volatility correlation function leads to a multifractal-
like behaviour of price changes [10–14], and has important
consequences for option pricing. Other stylized facts have
been reported, such as the leverage eﬀect that leads to
skewed distribution of price changes [15], or the apparent
increase of inter-stock correlations in volatile periods.
It is now very clear to many that these features are
very diﬃcult to explain within the traditional frame-
work of ‘rational expectations’, where all agents share
the same information, have an inﬁnite computation power
and act in a perfectly rational way (see e.g. the clear
discussion in the introduction of references [16,17] and
in [18]). Another route, much less formalized and still very
much in an exploratory stage, is followed by an increas-
ing number of academics. The aim is to assume as little
as possible about agents preferences and abilities, and to

422 The European Physical Journal B
explore generic classes of models, with the hope of ﬁnding
some plausible mechanisms that reproduce at least part
of the stylized facts recalled above. In this endeavor, one
should not be constrained by preexisting prejudices or es-
tablished frameworks. The ‘grand uniﬁcation’ of diﬀerent
mechanisms which would lead ﬁnally to a logically consis-
tent and simultaneous understanding of all the empirical
facts is deferred to later time s. Similarly, it is premature
to ask for rigorous proofs, but leave space for hand waving
arguments and numerical simulations.
In this paper, we report [19] the results of an artiﬁcial
market that bears some similarities with many previous
attempts [20–38]. Although the detailed behaviour of our
artiﬁcial market depends on the value of the diﬀerent pa-
rameters entering the model, only a few market typologies
are identiﬁed, and some qualitative features (such as the
long range volatility correlations) are robust to parame-
ter changes, at least in some regions of parameter space.
We explain in particular that the general mechanism pro-
posed in [39] is indeed responsible for volatility clustering
in our model. We also discuss, in this context, other agent
based models proposed so far in which this phenomenon
has been observed. We identify several other interesting
features (appearance of bubbles and crashes, inﬂuence of
the price ﬁxing procedure and of wealth constraints, of
transaction costs, etc.) that may be of some relevance to
real markets.
In our model, we have not included herding, or imita-
tion eﬀects. Each agent acts independently of other agents.
The correlations between their actions is entirely mediated
by the price history itself. Direct herding might also be im-
portant to account for the phenomenology of real markets
(see [29,40–42] and references therein). We leave to a fu-
ture study the extension of the present model to account
for these herding eﬀects.
The aftermath of our study (and of all other similar
studies) is the following paradox: in order to get a ‘good
looking’ price chart, one has to tune quite a bit the impor-
tant parameters of the model. What are the mechanisms
tuning the parameters in real markets to make them look
all alike? There must be some generic self-organization
mechanisms responsible for this selection. We discuss in
Section 6.1, in view of our results, what could be the
‘evolutionary’ driving forces relevant for this fundamen-
tal issue.
2 Set up of the model
2.1 Basic ingredients
In line with the original idea of the Santa Fe artiﬁcial mar-
ket [21,22], which was later simpliﬁed and popularized as
the Minority Game ( mg) [24,43,30,44,45], in our model
agents do not follow a rational expectation paradigm but
rather act inductively, adapting their behaviour to their
past experience. As in the mg each agent has a certain
ﬁxed number of strategies, each of which converts some
information into a decision. We will assume a world where
there are only two tradable assets: a stock, with ﬂuctuat-
ing price, and a bond, yielding a certain (known) risk free
rate ρ. The information on which the agents decide their
action will be the past history of the price itself. The de-
cision is to buy stocks (converting bonds in cash), to sell
stocks, or to be inactive (i.e. to hold bonds). Each strategy
is given a score, which is updated according to its perfor-
mance. The strategy played at time t by a given agent is
the one, among those available to him, which would have
best performed in a recent past. We take proper account
of the wealth balance of each agent, and proper market
clearing (i.e. matching supply and demand) is enforced.
2.2 Notations and deﬁnitions
Each agent i, i ∈{ 1, ..., N} has S − 1 active strategies
plus an inactive one. He owns, at time t,an u m b e rφi(t)
of stocks and Bi(t) of bonds. The price of the stock is
X(t), and therefore the total wealth of agent i is Bi(t)+
φi(t)X(t). The dynamics of the model, betweent and t+1,
is deﬁned by the following set of rules:
– Information:
We assume that all agents rely on thesame information
It,g i v e nb yt h em last steps of the past history of the
return time series (m is for ‘memory’). We choose the
information to be qualitative and to only depend on
the sign of the previous price changes:
It = {χ(t − m), ··· ,χ (t − 1)}
χ(t)=s i g n
[
log( X(t)
X(t − 1)) − ρ
]
. (1)
In this sense, our traders are ‘chartists’ on short time
scales, and take their decision based on the past pat-
tern of price changes. (We will add below the possibil-
ity for the agents not to follow their systematic strate-
gies, and act as ‘fundamental’ traders if the price is
too far from a reference value, or even act at random.)
A comment on the value of the time scale ‘1’ is in order
here. Clearly, diﬀerent agents observe the price time
series on diﬀerent time scales, from several minutes
for intra day traders to months for long term pension
funds. Here, we assume for simplicity that all agents
coarse-grain the price time series using the same clock,
and consider as meaningful price variations on – say –
a day or a week. All the parameters below were chosen
such as one time step roughly corresponds to a week of
trading. One interesting outcome of our model is that
even if all agents have the same intrinsic clock, a broad
range of time scales is spontaneously generated.
– Strategies:
Each agent i is endowed with a certain number S of
ﬁxed strategies, that convert information It into deci-
sion ϵi(It)= ±1, 0 (buy, sell, inactive). For example,
a ‘trend following’ strategy could be to choose ϵi =1
as soon as there is a majority of +’s in the signal It.
Another example is the inactive strategy, for which
ϵi ≡ 0, ∀I.

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 423
Each agent is given the possibility to remain inactive,
i.e. has an inactive strategy. The S − 1 other strate-
gies are chosen at random in the space of all strate-
gies (there are 2 2m
of them), in order to model het-
erogeneity in the agents capabilities. One can however
give a bias to this random choice, and favor ‘trend
following’ or ‘contrarian’ strategies. This is done by
deﬁning the ‘magnetization’ M ∈ [−1, 1] of the string
χ(1), ··· ,χ (m), deﬁned as:
M = 1
m
m∑
j=1
χ(j), (2)
and choose the corresponding decision to be ϵ=+ 1
with probability (1 + PM )/2a n dϵ= −1w i t hp r o b -
ability (1 − PM )/2. The parameter P ∈ [−1, 1] can
be called the ‘polarization’ of the strategies. If P =1 ,
trend following strategies are favored, whereasP = −1
corresponds to contrarian strategies. The choiceP =0
means no bias in the strategy space.
– Decision and buy orders:
Knowing the strategy used by agent i and the infor-
mation It allows one to compute the decision ϵi(t)o f
each agent. Depending on the value ofϵi(t), the agent
buys/sells a quantity qi(t) proportional to his current
belongings. More precisely, we set:
qi(t)= gBi(t)
X(t) for ϵi(t)=+ 1
qi(t)= −gφi(t)f o r ϵi(t)= −1
qi(t)=0 f o r ϵi(t)=0 . (3)
This means that we consider ‘prudent’ investors who
change their positions progressively: only a fraction g
of the cash is invested in stock between t and t +1i f
the signal is to buy, and the same fractiong of stock is
sold if the signal is to sell. Typical values used below
are g ∼ 1%.
The normalized total order imbalance, which will be
used to determine the change of price, is denotedQ(t):
Q(t)= 1
Φ
N∑
i=1
qi(t)= Q+(t) − Q−(t), (4)
where Φ is the total number of outstanding shares (that
we assume to be constant),Q+ is the fractional volume
of buy orders and Q− the fractional volume of sell
orders.
Agents sometimes choose to abandon their ‘chartist’
strategies when the price reaches levels that they feel
unreasonable: when the pri ce is too high, they are
likely to sell, and vice versa. More precisely, we con-
struct a long term average of past returns as:
r(t)= 1 − α
α
∑
t′<t
αt−t′
r(t′)
r(t′)=l o g
(X(t′+1 )
X(t′)
)
, (5)
where α< 1 deﬁnes the time scale T0 =1 / log(1/α)
over which the averaging is done, andr(t)i st h ei n s t a n -
taneous stock return. When
 r is larger than a certain
reference return ρ0, related to economy fundamentals,
the stock can be deemed as overvalued and ‘fundamen-
talists’ will sell ( ϵi = −1). Conversely, if
 r<ρ 0,t h e
stock is possibly undervalued, and ϵi =+ 1 .W em o d e l
the occurrence of fundamental trading as stochastic,
by assigning a certain probability pf for every agent
to follow a fundamental strategy rather than a tech-
nical (chartist) strategy. We want pf to increase with
|
r −ρ0|, and have chosen the following simple relation:
pf =m i n
(
1,f |
r − ρ0|
ρ0
)
, (6)
where f is a certain paramete r describing the conﬁ-
dence of agents in fundamental information. Since pf
increases when the price goes up too fast, fundamental-
ists have a stabilizing role and give to the price a mean
reverting component. In the following, we will assume
that on the long run, the overall economy growth ρ0
and the interest rate ρ are equal, and impose ρ0 = ρ,
although in practice the two ﬂuctuate with respect to
each other.
In the above rule, we have again assumed that all
agents use the same time scale to determine the past
average trend. This is probably very far from reality,
where one expects that thi s time scale could be very
diﬀerent for diﬀerent agents.
Finally, it can be useful to consider the inﬂuence of
‘irrational’ traders, who take their decisions on the ba-
sis of random coin tossing only. We deﬁne pi as the
probability for an agent to take a random decision.
In this case, the probability to be a fundamentalist is
(1 − pi)pf .
– Price formation and market clearing mechanism:
Once the aggregate order imbalance Q(t)i sk n o w n ,
we update the price following a simple linear rule
[20,21,26,27,41]:
r(t)= Q(t)
λ , (7)
where
r(t)=l o g
(X(t +1 )
X(t)
)
≃ X(t +1 )
X(t) − 1( 8 )
is the logarithmic price return andλ is a measure of the
‘stiﬀness’ of the market. There has been recent empiri-
cal studies of this relation, which was shown to hold for
individual stocks for small enough Q, on a suﬃciently
large time interval [47]. For larger order imbalance, the
price response appears to bend downward, a possible
consequence of the structure of the order books. We
have included this eﬀect, with no noticeable eﬀect on
the qualitative results presented below.
From a more microscopic point of view, i.e. on time
scales smaller than the time unit that we have cho-
sen, agents place orders of diﬀerent types in the mar-
ket: market orders and limit orders. Market orders al-
lows the order to be executed with certainty, but at

424 The European Physical Journal B
the current market price. Limit orders ensures a max-
imum price for buy orders (and a minimum price for
sell orders) but can be unexecuted, or only partially
executed, depending on the history of the price. There-
fore, in general, the order put down by an agent will
be only partially ﬁlled. We assume that the fraction of
unfulﬁlled orders is the same for all agents trying to
buy (if the number of sold shares is insuﬃcient), or for
all agents trying to sell in the opposite case.
Market clearing is then ensured by the following rule:
the global amount of sell orders is Q−(t), and the
total number of shares that can be bought at price
X(t +1 )i s :
˜Q+(t)= Q+(t) X(t)
X(t +1 ) · (9)
The fraction of ﬁlled buy orders ϕ+ (resp. ﬁlled sell
orders ϕ−) is therefore:
ϕ+ =m i n
(
1, Q−
˜Q+
)
ϕ− =m i n
(
1,
˜Q+
Q−
)
· (10)
From these quantities, one determines the actual num-
ber of shares δφi bought or sold by agent i:
δφi(t)= gϕ+
Bi(t)
X(t +1 ) for ϵi(t) > 0
δφi(t)= −gϕ−φi(t)f o r ϵi(t) < 0. (11)
Note that ϕ+ and ϕ− are diﬀerent: they are deﬁned in
a such a way that the total amount of sold shares is
exactly the same as the total amount of bought shares
at all times, as can be checked by inspection.
Of course, the above rules are to some extent arbi-
trary but are consistent and represent qualitatively, in
a phenomenological way the results of a double-auction
market in which the probability of being unexecuted
is ﬁnite. Another rule, such that there are no unexe-
cuted orders (and would correspond to a market with
only market orders with a matching rule) would be to
update the price in such a way that ˜Q+(t)= Q−(t).
Interestingly, this leads to a very unrealistic dynamics
where the price is not continuous but jumps up and
down in a random way. This would indeed be the case
in a market with no market makers and no limit orders:
the lack of liquidity would lead to a totally unstable
price process.
– Wealth dynamics:
We now have all the ingredients to update the number
of stocks and bonds of agent i, i.e.:
φi(t +1 )= φi(t)+ δφi(t)
Bi(t +1 )= Bi(t)(1 +ρ) − δφi(t)X(t +1 ), (12)
where the last line adds the interest gained on the
bonds between t and t + 1 to the cash need to ﬁnance
new stocks, or gained through stock selling. Note that
there is an injection of wealth due to the positive inter-
est rate ρ. We will discuss this further in the following.
– Update of the scores:
Each agent assigns scores to his strategies to measure
their performance and uses at time t the best strat-
egy, i.e. the one with highest scores. We need now to
specify how the scores of the diﬀerent strategies are
updated. The score of the αth strategy of agent i at
time t is denoted Sα
i (t), whereas the decision associ-
ated to this strategy when the available information
at time t is It is ϵα
i (It). When the agent i decides
at time t to trade, the price at which the trade takes
place isX(t + 1). Therefore, thevirtual proﬁt he makes
due to this trade is only known at time t +2a n di s
ϵα
i (It)[X(t +2 ) − X(t + 1)]. We choose to update the
score of the active strategies proportionally to the rel-
ative proﬁt, corrected by the interest rate1:
Sα
i (t +1 )=( 1 − β)Sα
i (t)+ βϵα
i (It−1)[r(t) − ρ],
α =1 , ..., S− 1, (13)
whereas the score of the inactive strategy is identically
zero. The parameter β ≤ 1 deﬁnes a memory time: the
performance of the strategies is only computed using
the recent part of the history. More precisely, the per-
formance is evaluated over a periodT ∼ 1/|log(1 −β)|
and is longer the smaller the value of β.T h es h o r t -
est memory corresponds to β = 1, when scores are
evaluated on the basis of the last performance of the
strategy performance2.
Note that the update of the scores is not weighted by
the actual transaction volume: good decisions are val-
ued independently of the current wealth of the agent.
Therefore, the score of the strategy is not proportional
to the actual proﬁt and loss curve.
One should keep in mind that for any β ⁄=0o n l yt h e
best strategy α∗(t) is played by the agent at time t.
Nevertheless, he updates the scores of all strategies as
if they had been played. In other words, market im-
pact is neglected here, since the very fact of using a
given strategy inﬂuences the price itself. The history of
the price would have been diﬀerent if a diﬀerent strat-
egy had been played. We do not take into account the
market impact for two reasons: ﬁrst, the update of the
score is delayed as compared to the action itself (see
Eq. (13)) – therefore, the main source of systematic
bias discussed in the context of the Minority Game
in, e.g. [46], is removed. Second, market impact is in
practice very hard to estimate for traders themselves
(although some recent studies start addressing this is-
sue [47–49]), and strategies are often backtested under
the assumption that the market impact is small.
A related point is that of the virtual proﬁt computed
above. Taking proﬁt means closing one’s position, at a
1 A similar rule for the update of scores was recently consid-
ered in [38].
2 Following equation (13), for β = 0 all scores are equal
and time independent. According to our algorithm, each agent
chooses at random the strategy to use. The value β =0i s
pathological: for any ﬁnite (even if small) value of β there are
ﬁnite diﬀerences among the scores of the various strategies,
and consequently a best strategy can be identiﬁed.

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 425
3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 800 0
0
5
10
15
3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 800 0
0
5
10
15
3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
0
5
10
15
P=0
P=0
P=-0.2
Stable
Intermittent
Periodic
Fig. 1. Typical price charts in the three regimes: oscillatory, intermittent, stable (eﬃcient). The parameters are:S =3 , m =5 ,
g =0 .005, f =0 .05, N = 1001, β =1 0−2 and 1 − α =1 0−4. The top graph corresponds to g/λ =0 .1, the two bottom graphs
to g/λ =0 .6.
price that is not known in advance. Again there will be
some market impact and the actual price of the trans-
action is on average less than the current price. This
eﬀect is well known to active market participants and,
as mentioned above, has been recently the subject of
some studies. A way to model this is to add a transac-
tion cost to the above update of the score, independent
of whether one buys or sells. (This cost should also be
taken into account in the above wealth balance.)
2.3 Summary of the parameters and main results
The model contains a rather large number of parameters:
the interest rate ρ, the memory length used for technical
trading m, the ‘polarization’ of strategies P, the fraction
of invested wealth g, the time scale used to trigger funda-
mental trading α, the propensity of fundamental trading
f and the fraction of irrational agents pi, the stiﬀness of
the market λ, and the memory time of agents when the
score of the strategies are updated, β. As we shall see,
the most important parameters are g/λ and the polar-
ization P, which determine the qualitative behaviour of
price changes. The other parameters inﬂuence the quanti-
tative results, but do not in general modify the qualitative
features, apart from special cases which will be explicitly
discussed in the following sections. As the values of g/λ
and P are varied, we observe the appearance of three qual-
itatively diﬀerent regimes (see Fig. 1):
– An Oscillatory Regime , corresponding to ‘weak cou-
pling’: g/λ ≲ 0.4, and P ≥ 0, where speculative
bubbles are formed, and ﬁnally collapse in sudden
crashes induced by the fundamentalist behaviour. In
this regime, markets are not eﬃcient, and a large frac-
tion of the orders is (on average) unfulﬁlled.
– An Intermittent regime (g/λ /greaterorsimilar0.4, P ≥− |P0|)w h e r e
the ‘stylized’ facts of liquid markets are well repro-
duced: the market is eﬃcient (although some persistent
or antipersistent correlations survive), the returns fol-
low a power law distribution, and volatility clustering
is present.
– A Stable regime , which arises if the polarization P
is suﬃciently negative (predominance of contrarian
strategies). In this case, the ﬂuctuations of the price
are mild and mean reverting (see Fig. 1c), as one would
expect in a ‘rational market’ where the trading price
is always close to the fundamental price.
A (rather schematic) phase diagram of the model in the
plane (g/λ,P ) for a ﬁxed value of all the other parameters
is shown in Figure 2. This qualitative phase diagram is the
central result of our study.
3 Kinematics of the model: fully random
strategies
Before embarking to analyze the inﬂuence of strategies,
it is important to calibrate the bare version of our model
where agents take purely random, uncorrelated decisions
at each instant of time. In this case, the price ﬂuctua-
tions will only reﬂect the wealth constraints. We show in

426 The European Physical Journal B
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.8 0
g/λ
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
 P
Periodic
Intermittent
Stable (anticorrelated)
Intermittent
(correlated)
(Random Walk)
Fig. 2. Phase diagram of the model. The region g/λ > 0.4, P> −|P0| corresponds to an intermittent regime, with small linear
correlations but strong volatility ﬂuctuations. The dashed lines correspond to crossover regions, where a mixed behaviour is
observed.
9000 10000 11000 12000 1300 0
 Time
10
11
12
13
14
15 Log price
1 10 100 1000
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Fig. 3. Behaviour of the price as a function of time for purely random strategies. Inset: Variogram of the price ﬂuctuations,
and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck ﬁt.
Figure 3 the price chart for some values of the param-
eters. The log-price perform s a mean reverting random
walk around the fundamental price Xf (t)=e x p (ρt). In
the inset we show the log-price variogram, deﬁned as:
V(τ)=
⟨(
log X(t + τ)
X(t) − ρτ
)2⟩
, (14)
together with an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck ﬁt:
V(τ)= V∞ (1 − exp(−τ/τ 0)), (15)
that describes a mean reverting random walk with a re-
verting timeτ0, and mean square excursion from the mean
equal to V∞. For small τ, the behaviour of V(τ) is lin-
ear in τ, as for a free random walk, indicating that ran-
dom trading leads, as expected, to unpredictable price
changes. However, on larger time scales, the limitation

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 427
of wealth and of stocks (agents cannot borrow nor short
sell stocks) prevents the price from wandering inﬁnitely
far from the fundamental price, and leads to a mean-
reverting behaviour. This mechanism will also operate for
more complicated trading rules and will be discussed again
in Section 5.
It is simple to understand how these quantities depend
on the parameters g,λ . From the price ﬁxing mechanism,
one can write a Langevin equation for the price that reads:
r(t)= dl o gX
dt = g
2λφ
(B(t)
X − φ + ξ(t)
)
, (16)
where B(t) is the average of an agent wealth in bonds, φ
the average number of stocks per agent, andξ is a random
binomial variable measuring the small oﬀset from a perfect
50–50 division between buyers and sellers. The variance
of ξ(t) is therefore of order N −1. Equation (16) indeed
describes a mean reverting process aroundB(t): when the
price is too high, the demand goes down due to budget
constraints and the price goes down, and vice versa.T h e
long term increase of price is only due, in our model, to
the continuous injection of cash through the interest rate.
Equation (16) deﬁnes a mean reverting process, that
allows one to obtain in particular:
τ0 ∝ λφ
g V∞ ∝ g
Nλφ , (17)
in agreement with numerical results. The short ti-
me volatility of the market, for τ ≪ τ0,i sg i v e nb y
σ2 = V∞/τ0 ∝ g2/N λ2φ2,a n di ss m a l lf o r‘ s t i ﬀ e r ’m a r -
kets, or if the fraction of invested wealth is smaller, as ex-
pected. Also, the volatility decreases when the number of
agents increases. For a market with 104 participants such
that g = 10%, this formula gives a reasonable volatility of
1% per week, when the market stiﬀness is λ ∼ 0.1. How-
ever, in this case, the return time is also of the order of a
week and the total variability of prices is 1%, both being
far too small compared to reality.
Let us ﬁnally note that from the simulations, the mar-
ket liquidity, measured as the fractionc of fulﬁlled orders,
improves when the market stiﬀness λ decreases. For ex-
ample, we ﬁnd c =0 .9f o rg =1 % ,λ =1 ,a n dc =0 .98
for g =1 % ,λ =0 .1.
4 The oscillatory regime
This regime is characterized by the presence of regular
bubbles followed by rapid ‘crashes’. The period of the bub-
bles is a function of the model parameters. In Figure 4 we
show the dependence of the period on g/λ,f o rs o m eﬁ x e d
values of the other parameters. The period decreases as
g/λ increases, and vanishes when the market enters the
intermittent regime. On the same plot, we have also shown
the fraction c of fulﬁlled orders, which is very low in the
oscillatory phase and increases with g/λ.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
g/λ
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
 T
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 c
Fig. 4. Period T of the oscillations (open circles, left scale),
and fraction c of fulﬁlled orders (black squares, right scale), as
a function of g/λ. All other parameters are as in Figure 1.
4.1 A qualitative discussion
We want to understand the mechanism underlying the cre-
ation and persistence of bubbles, and their ﬁnal collapse.
To answer this question, one has to look back at
equation (7) that describes the price dynamics. Since
the strategies are randomly distributed among agents,
we can expect that at the beginning of the game one
half of the agents is willing to buy and the other half
to sell. The price increment is therefore r = δX/X ∼
gλ−1N/(2Φ)[B/X − Φ]. Since in general B/X ⁄= Φ,t h e
price rises or decreases. Suppose that the initial condi-
tions are such that it increases. If g/λ is small, both the
wealth and number of shares of the agents change quite
slowly, and therefore B/X − Φ will keep a constant sign
for a while. This will generate a history of price of the
form ..,1, 1, 1, 1, 1... (see Eq. (1)). This is the initial stage
of the bubble. Now, the population of agents fall into two
categories: those who have at least one strategy such that
..,1, 1, 1, 1, 1 sends a buy signal, and those who do not
have such a strategy availabl e. The buy-strategies keep
being rewarded, while the sell ones keep loosing points:
agents who can buy will continue buying, while agents who
cannot will soon become inactive since all active strate-
gies have a negative score. In this way the bubble is self-
sustained and the price keeps increasing. This ‘majority’
mechanism was discussed in the context of the Minority
Game in [36,38]. However, the buying power of the buy-
ers decreases, because the price increases and the available
cash decreases. Hence, the relative return of the stock over
the risk-free rate diminishes, and the score of the buying
strategies only become marg inally positive (because the
initial large gains are forgotten, only the recent past is in-
cluded in the calculation of the scores). Since the average
past return exceeds the reference rateρ0, a certain fraction
of agents become fundamentalist and act contrarily to the
main trend, i.e. sell. As soon as their action is such that
the price drops, the history will change to ..,1, 1, 1, 1, −1.

428 The European Physical Journal B
At this point, one half of the active agents still receive a
buy signal, but the other half receive a sell signal (since
strategies are random, and for now unbiased – P =0 ) .
Now, these selling agents have a lot of stocks, since they
have been buying for a long time, whereas the still buying
agents have a poor buying power. This obviously results
in a series of −1, and an ‘anti-bubble’ is created. This
anti-bubble has a large initial negative slope because the
system starts in a highly unb alanced state. There is no
symmetry between a bubble and an antibubble because of
the presence of a non zero interest rate, which is a source
of cash and favors, on average, positive trends. Once again,
it is the presence of fundamentalist agents which at some
point triggers the end of the descending trend, and re-
establish a bubble. The precise time at which the bubble
collapses is random, and the way the collapse is triggered
is very similar to a nucleation process (see next section).
One interesting quantity is the fraction of fulﬁlled or-
ders. In the oscillating regime, one understands from the
above arguments that the unbalance between buy orders
and sell orders is in general very large, leading to great
amount of unfulﬁlled orders. The fraction c of fulﬁlled or-
ders increases with g/λ: see Figure 4. As will be discussed
below, this is a driving force to escape from this oscillat-
ing regime, which obviously does not look at all like real
markets.
The eﬀect of the polarization P, which can be appre-
ciated in the phase diagram of Figure 2, is quite easy to
understand in the light of this microscopic analysis: a pos-
itive value ofP increases the average number of trend fol-
lowers and therefore is almost irrelevant for the bubble
dynamics which is based on an endogenous trend follow-
ing behaviour. On the other handP< 0 acts contrarily to
the bubble creation forcing a percentage of agents to act
against the trend. Interestingly enough, as it can be seen
from the phase diagram, even a smallP< 0i sa b l et op r e -
vent the appearance of a bubble. As a function of|P |,t h e
transition between an oscillating behaviour and a stable
behaviour is ﬁrst-order like, in the sense that the period
of the oscillation is still ﬁnite when the transition occurs.
The above mechanism also allows us to understand
t h er o l eo ft h ep a r a m e t e r sf or the fraction of irrational
agents pi. The numerical simulations indicate that increas-
ing the value of these parameters may at ﬁrststabilize the
oscillating phase, while one would intuitively expect an
opposite behaviour since fundamentalists/irrational play-
ers reduce the relative number of trend followers. This
eﬀect can be explained in the following way. We have seen
that, as the price increases during the bubble, the available
cash of active players and therefore their buying power de-
creases bringing the bubble to saturation. However, each
active agent has a certain probability proportional tof to
become a fundamentalist and sell, increasing his wealth
in cash. The buying pressure can then stay higher for a
longer period of time, determining more stable bubbles.
Of course, as f increases substantially, its other eﬀect of
nucleating opposite trends becomes the most important
one, and the system behaves much as if the polarization
parameter P was strongly negative, and thus prevents the
appearance of bubbles. Finally, the presence of irrational
agents who buy or sell randomly, and therefore statisti-
cally drop out of the order imbalance, can be seen as
reducing the eﬀective value of g, and thus – somewhat
surprisingly – stabilizing the oscillating regime. On the
other hand, in this regime the properties of the system
behaviour do not depend signiﬁcantly on the memory β.
Indeed, during the bubble even a very short memory is
enough to select the buying strategy as the best one be-
cause buying strategies win at each step of time. A similar
argument holds for selling strategies during the crash.
We now turn to a mathematical transcription of the
above discussion, that allows us to characterize more ac-
curately the shape of the bubbles in our model.
Note ﬁnally that, when each agent has a small number
of strategies, the oscillating regime tends to die out for
very long times, since the amplitude of the bubbles pro-
gressively decreases. This is due to the fact that agents
that have a buying strategy during the bubble tend to
underperform on the long run. Their wealth is, at long
times, insuﬃcient to sustain the bubble. In order to de-
termine the oscillation period more precisely, we have ar-
tiﬁcially given to each agent both its initial strategy and
its perfect mirror image. This prevents the appearance
of two groups with systematically diﬀerent wealths, with-
out changing the basic mechanism leading to bubbles and
crashes.
4.2 A mean-ﬁeld description
In this section we try to describe the bubble-crash dynam-
ics by means of some mean-ﬁeld equations. As we shall see,
this will enable us to understand the precise mechanism
of the bubble saturation and the consequent crash occur-
rence.
We start by deﬁning the relevant mean-ﬁeld variables:
the average amount B of bonds and the average stock
amount φ hold by active agents. It is also useful to deﬁne
the number of buyers/sellers Nb,N s. Note that since only
part of the agents are active during the bubble-crash dy-
namics φ is diﬀerent from Φ/N, the average stock amount
per agent. Besides, since active players may act as trend
followers but also as fundamentalists,φ m a yv a r yi nt i m e .
Our aim is to write some evolution equations for these
average quantities and for the price. In the following we
shall consider the continuous time limit of equations (7),
(12) and (5). We have:
r(t)= dl o gX
dt = 1
λQ(t) (18)
r(t)= 1
T0
∫ t
0
dτ exp(−t − τ
T0
)r(τ), (19)
where T0 =1 / ln(1/α) (see Eq. (5)). On the other hand
the precise expression of the global action Q(t)a sw e l la s
the wealths dynamics is not the same during the whole
bubble-crash cycle and to write down appropriate equa-
tions it is necessary to distinguish diﬀerent regimes where

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 429
the agents behaviour can be considered as homogeneous in
time. In general we can assume that during the bubble all
the active players are buyers, except for a small percent-
age of fundamentalists who start selling when the price
increases too much. On the contrary, during the crash all
active agents become sellers while the fundamentalists will
eventually act as buyers. In the following, we shall consider
the case where the parameters g/λ and f are very small.
4.2.1 Beginning of the bubble:
 r(t) <ρ
At the beginning of the bubble the price starts increas-
ing but is still lower than the fundamental reference value
exp(ρt). This implies that all active agents, including the
fundamentalists, are buyers. The total number of buyers
is therefore given by all the agents who have at least one
buying strategy, plus a stochastic contribution given by
the fundamentalists:
Nb = N
(
1 − 1
2s
)
+ N
2s pf, (20)
where s = S − 1. On the other hand, the active sellers
rapidly disappear as the score of the corresponding strat-
egy deteriorates. The price rises without transaction, but
since g/λ is small, it does so rather slowly. since all players
who have not a buying strategy prefer to remain inactive.
In this context, it is evident that no transaction can be re-
alized at all since there is a complete unbalance between
oﬀer and demand, and the parameter ϕ+, which deter-
mines the fraction of fulﬁlled orders, is therefore identi-
cally zero. The evolution equations are in this case very
simple (see Eqs. (7, 12)):
r(t)= g
λNb
B
ΦX (21)
and:
dB
dt = ρB dφ
dt =0 . (22)
The initial rate of growth of the bubble r0 is therefore
given by:
r0 ≈ g
λ
B0N
X0Φ
(
1 − 1
2s
)
, (23)
where B0 = B(t = t0)a n dX0 = X(t = t0), and t0 is the
start date of the bubble. This gives a good approximation,
as can be seen from Figure 5. Since the value of X0 just
after the crash is small, the buying power is high and r0
is much larger than ρ.T h ev a l u eo f
r(t) therefore steadily
increases.
4.2.2 Saturation of the bubble:
 r(t) >ρ
In this regime the fundamentalist players start acting con-
trarily to the main trend and take their proﬁt, thereby
reestablishing some trading activity. We now have:
Nb = N(1 − 1
2s )(1 − pf ) Ns = Npf (24)
18000 19000 20000 2100014
16
18
20
22
Fig. 5. Bubble-crash dynamics in the oscillatory regime for
g/λ =0 .005, and ρ =0 .001, f =0 .005, α =0 .9999. The
straight line corresponds to numerical data, the dashed lines
to the mean-ﬁeld approximations (see text), and the dotted line
to the best exponential ﬁt in the bubble saturation regime.
and the return and wealths evolution equations now read
r(t)= g
λΦ
(
Nb
B
X − Ns
N Φ
)
(25)
dB
dt = ρB − (1 − pf)gϕ+B + pf gφX (26)
dφ
dt =( 1 − pf )gϕ+
B
X − pf gφ (27)
w h e r ew eh a v ea s s u m e dt h a tϕ+ = pfΦX/NbB ≪ 1, which
is consistent when f ≪ 1. In this limit, the equations
simplify signiﬁcantly, since all terms containingpf can be
neglected. Introducing the buying power Υ = B/X,o n e
has:
r ≈ gN
λΦ (1 − 1
2s )Υ dΥ
dt ≈ (ρ − r)Υ, (28)
from which one extracts:
dr
dt =( ρ − r)r −→r(t)= ρ
1 − Aexp(−ρt), (29)
with A =( r0 − ρ)/r0 > 0. This shows that r(t) tends for
long times to the overall growth rate of the economy. This
is expected since a faster growth cannot be sustained be-
cause of budget constraints: the buying power would then
tend to zero. We also ﬁnd that r(t) tends to ρ exponen-
tially, with a decay rate γ equal to ρ itself. A better ap-
proximation for γ can be obtained by retaining the small
terms dropped in the above analysis. In Figure 5 we show
the curve obtained from equation (29) with the value ofγ
estimated analytically together with the best exponential
ﬁt of the data, and ﬁnd very good agreement.
In this limit whereρT0 ≫ 1, one can show that
r(t)−ρ
hardly varies during the bubble period, and is approxi-
mately equal to Aρ. We show in Figure 6 the time evolu-
tion of various quantities during this bubble.

430 The European Physical Journal B
18000 18500 19000 195000.001
0.0015
0.002
0.0025
0.003
18000 18500 19000 19500
t
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Fig. 6. Upper graph: Behaviour ofr(t) (note the ﬂuctuations)
and
 r(t) as a function of t in the bubble-saturation regime
(respectively, straight and dashed lines). Lower graph: For
the same time-interval, the buying power B/X (straight line)
and φ (dashed line). Same values of parameters as in Figure 5.
The knowledge ofγ also allows us to estimate the time
of occurrence of the crash. We know that the bubble is
sustained because buying strategies keep being rewarded
when the price keeps increasing. Nevertheless, we have
seen that during the bubble saturation the average re-
turn approaches the reference value ρ,t h u sa l s ot h ep e r -
formance of buying strategies (i.e. their scores relative to
the risk free rate) will increase less as time goes on; a small
drop of price might then be enough to both trigger some
strong selling strategies and favor the inactive strategy, re-
ducing the buying pressure. In the absence of ﬂuctuations,
the average role of the fundamentalists is to renormalize
the values ofA and γ in equation (29) above. The number
of fundamentalists is however a stochastic Poisson pro-
cess, and ﬂuctuates around the average value Npf with
variance σf =
√
Npf . One therefore expects that when
r(t) − ρ becomes of the order of gσf /λN,o n eo fs u c h
positive ﬂuctuations will bring the instantaneous return
below ρ and the price history will therefore change from
1, 1, 1, ...,1t o1 , 1, 1, ...,−1, from which a sudden wave of
sell orders triggers the crash. A reasonable estimate of the
bubble end-time t⋆ is therefore given by:
ρAexp (−γ(t⋆ − t0)) ≈ g
λ
√
 pf
N , (30)
or
t⋆ − t0 ≈ 1
2γ log
(Aλ2ρ2NγT 0
fg 2
)
(31)
which indeed has the correct order of magnitude and
qualitative behaviour, increasing with decreasingg/λ (see
Fig. 4). Note also that as f → 0, the bubbles have an
inﬁnite lifetime, as we have seen in our simulations. Some
fundamentalist behaviour is needed to nucleate a crash.
4.2.3 Crash
At the beginning of the crash all the fundamentalists act
as sellers since one still has
 r(t) >ρ .T h u s
Nb =0 Ns = N
(
1 − 1
2s
)
+ Npf
1
2s (32)
and the initial slope of the crash is now given by:
r⋆ ≈− g
λ
N
Φ
(
1 − 1
2s
)
· (33)
When at some point
 r(t) becomes smaller than ρ
the fundamentalists start acting again contrarily to the
main trend driving back the price toward the fundamen-
tal value Xf (t). We may expect a saturation eﬀect as in
the previous regime, which would enable an asymptotic
expansion. However, as it can be seen from the ﬁgures,
the crash period is much shorter than the bubble one and
the crash stops much before any asymptotic regime set in.
The reason for this asymmetry is the interest rate that
‘reﬁlls’ the buying power in the bubble regime, that has
no counterpart in the crash regime. The crash ends in the
same way as the bubble does, through a nucleation pro-
cess when r(t) −ρ becomes of the order of the ﬂuctuations
(which are in this case much larger).
5 The intermittent regime
5.1 Results from the simulation
Upon increasing the parameterg/λ, the oscillating regime
disappears and gives rise to an interesting market be-
haviour, where diﬀerent market ‘states’ coexist: bubbles
and crashes, periods of very small activity, and periods of
very large activity, intermixed with each another. A typ-
ical chart of the returns and of the volume as a function
of time is plotted in Figure 7. From visual inspection, it
is quite clear that the return time series exhibits volatility
clustering. We now turn to a more quantitative analy-
sis of the price series statistics. The data we analyze be-
low corresponds to N = 10 000 agents, with ‘unpolarized’
strategies P =0 ,a n df o rg/λ =0 .75, deep in the intermit-
tent regime (see Fig. 2). Other parameters are identical to
those in Figure 1. We note that the qualitative eﬀects we
report below have not been seen to depend onN,a tl e a s t
up to N = 10 000 which is the largest size we have inves-
tigated. Strong size eﬀects, reported in the Lux-Marchesi
model [29] for instance, seem to be absent in our case.
However, we expect that whenN becomes comparable to
the total number of strategies (i.e. 22m
), the phenomenol-
ogy will change since many agents will share exactly the
same strategies.

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 431
10000 15000 2000 0
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
10000 15000 20000
0.73
0.75
0.77
 Volume
Fig. 7. Time series of the returns, truncated to ±10% (top panel), and of the fraction of active agents (bottom panel), for
g/λ =0 .75.
1 10 100 100 0
 τ
0.01
0.1
1
 V(τ)
Fig. 8. Variogram of the price as a function of the time lag,
together with an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (mean-reverting) ﬁt.
First, we look at the price variogram, deﬁned by equa-
tion (14). This is shown in Figure 8, together with an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck ﬁt. The saturation time τ0 is of the
order of 100; taking the unit time in our model to be the
week, this corresponds to one or two years, with a volatil-
ity of roughly 20% per year, which is quite reasonable.
As explained in Section 3 the saturation is a direct conse-
quence of the bounded wealth of agents. Is there a similar
mean-reverting trend in real markets? The analysis of the
variogram of the Dow-Jones index, for example, in the pe-
riod 1950–2000, shows no convincing sign of saturation on
the scale of the year, although a slight bend down wards
for longer time lag is visible, but the data become noisy.
There has been reports in the literature of a systematic
mean-reverting eﬀects on the scale of 5–10 years, perhaps
related to the mechanism discussed here. Remember that
the fundamental price in our model has zero volatility. The
short time volatility is the result of pure trading, which
leads to a random walk like behaviour of the price; the
saturation occurs because of insuﬃcient resources to sus-
tain a large diﬀerence between the fundamental price and
the speculative price.
The two other quantities that we have systematically
studied are the volume variogram and the absolute return
variogram. The variogram of a time dependent quantity
is deﬁned as:
V(τ)=
⟨
(O(t + τ) − O(t))2
⟩
· (34)
We have considered the cases where O(t)i se q u a lt o
the fraction of active agents (deﬁning Vv)a n dw h e r e
O(t)= |r(t)| (deﬁning Vσ). We show these two quanti-
ties in Figure 9 as a function of √
τ, together with a ﬁt
inspired from the theory explained in the next section:
V(τ)|SQRT = V∞
(
1 − exp
(
−
√
 τ
τ0
))
. (35)
Note that the short time behaviour of the above function
is √
τ, in contrast with the regular (linear) behaviour of
the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck form. We will explain the origin
of this singularity below, and explain why equation (35)
ﬁts very well the volume variogram. Note also that|r(t)| is
only a noisy proxy for the true quantity of interest, namely
the volatility. Since the ‘measurement’ noise is expected
to be uncorrelated at diﬀerent instants of time, we use a

432 The European Physical Journal B
0 1 02 03 04 0
τ
1/2
0
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0008
Vv(τ)
 Data
 MG fit
 Power−law, α=0.036
0 1 02 03 04 0
τ
1/2
0.016
0.018
0.020
0.022
0.024
Vσ(τ)
 Data
 MG fit
 Power−law, α=0.32
Fig. 9. Variogram of the volume (top panel) and of the absolute return (bottom panel) as a function of the time lag, together
with the ﬁts given by equations (35, 37). The parameters of the ﬁt are given in the text.
slightly modiﬁed ﬁt (which is also useful to deal with real
market data):
V(τ)|SQRT = V∞
(
1 − exp
(
−
√
 τ
τ0
))
+ V0 (1 − δτ,0).
(36)
We have also used a power-law ﬁt
V(τ)|PWR = V∞
(
1 −
( τ
τ0
)−α)
, (37)
which has been advocated in many empirical studies of
the volatility, with α ∼ 0.1 − 0.3 [8,10].
As can be seen from Figure 9, the two ﬁts are of compa-
rable quality. The relevant parameters of the ﬁt are, forVv,
τ0 ≈ 46 using equation (35) and τ0 ≈ 1a n dα ≈ 0.0365
using equation (37), and for Vσ, one ﬁnds τ0 ≈ 7.4a n d
V0/V∞ ≈ 2.2 using equation (36) and τ0 ≈ 0.017 and
α ≈ 0.325 using equation (37). Note that the value of α
found for Vv(τ) is signiﬁcantly smaller that that forVσ(τ),
as also found for real market data. The reason for this will
be explained in the next section.
We have also studied the distribution of returns. Not
surprisingly, this distribution is found to be highly kurtic,
which is expected since the volatility is ﬂuctuating. The
tail of the distribution can be ﬁtted by a power-law, with
an exponent µ ≈ 3.5, similar to the value reported in [50]:
see Figure 10. Note that the negative tail is slightly fatter
than the positive tail. We also show a Student-t distribu-
tion with a tail index µ = 4, that ﬁts quite well the whole
distribution.
The role of a non zero polarization of strategies P is,
for small enough P, to induce some correlations (or anti-
correlations) in the returns. For P< 0, as was the case
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
r
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
P
>
(r)
g/λ=0.5
 Positive returns
 Negative returns
 Power−law µ=3.4
 Student−t
Fig. 10. Distribution of returns for g/λ =0 .5. A power-law
tail with µ =3 .4 and a Student-t distribution with a tail index
µ = 4 are shown for comparison.
for the oscillating regime, there is a ﬁrst-order (discon-
tinuous) transition toward a stable market, with small,
strongly anticorrelated ﬂuctuations that track the funda-
mental price. This transition occurs for rather small val-
ues of |P |≈ 0.03. For P> 0, on the other hand, the
intermittent phase survives but the variogram of price
ﬂuctuations shows signiﬁcant positive correlations. For
suﬃciently large P, the oscillating phase reappears in a
continuous way.

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 433
The conclusion of this section is that volatility cluster-
ing appears for large values of g/λ. Qualitatively similar
eﬀects are seen for diﬀerent choices of m (memory time
for the strategies), β (memory time for the scores), and S
(number of strategies per agent), provided g/λ is large
enough to be in the intermittent phase. A crucial ingredi-
ent, however, is the existence of an inactive strategy,i.e.,
the fact that the volume of activity is allowed to ﬂuctuate.
We have not been able to obtain long term volatility corre-
lations of the type reported in Figure 9 when all strategies
are active. This observation has motivated us to propose a
simple mechanism for non trivial volume (and volatility)
ﬂuctuations [39,19], that we discuss now in the present
context.
5.2 A simple mechanism for long-ranged volume
correlations
5.2.1 Random time strategy shifts
In the above model, as in the Minority Game, scores are
attributed by agents to their possible strategies, as a func-
tion of their past performance. In particular, the inactive
strategy is adopted when the score of all active strategies
are negative.
In the intermittent regime we have seen that the mar-
ket is ‘quasi-eﬃcient’: the autocorrelation of the price in-
crements is close to zero. To a ﬁrst approximation no strat-
egy can on the long run be proﬁtable. This implies that
the strategy scores locally behave, as a function of time,
as random walks. This very fact enables us to explain the
ﬂuctuations of volume. Let us consider for simplicity the
case S = 2 (one active strategy and one inactive strat-
egy per agent). Since the switch between two strategies
occurs when their scores cross, the activity of an agent is
determined by the survival time of the active strategy over
the inactive one, that is by the return time of a random
walk (the score of the active strategy) to zero. The inter-
esting point is that these return times are well known to
be power-law distributed. This leads immediately to the
non trivial behaviour of the activity variogram shown in
Figure 9. The same argument was used to explain the vol-
ume ﬂuctuations in the Minority Game with an inactive
strategy, in the eﬃcient phase [39].
More formally, let us deﬁne the quantity θi(t)t h a ti s
e q u a lt o1i fa g e n ti is active at time t, and 0 if inactive.
The total activity is given by v(t)= ∑
i θi(t), and the
activity variogram is given by
Vv(t, t′)=
⟨
[v(t) − v(t′)]2⟩
= Cv(t, t)+ Cv(t′,t ′) − 2Cv(t, t′). (38)
where Cv(t′,t ) denotes the volume correlation function.
One can consider two extreme cases which lead to the
same result, up to a multiplicative constant: (a) agents fol-
low completely diﬀerent strategies and have independent
activity patterns, i.e. ⟨θiθj ⟩∝ δi,j or (b) agents follow
very similar strategies, in which case θi = θj.I nb o t h
cases, Cv(t, t′) is proportional to ⟨θi(t)θi(t′)⟩and can be
exactly expressed in terms of the distribution P(s)o ft h e
survival timess of the active strategies [51,39]. For an un-
conﬁned random walk, the return time distribution P(s)
decays as s−3/2 for large s. Note that thiss−3/2 behaviour
is super-universal and only requires short range correla-
tion in the score increments, not even a ﬁnite second mo-
ment [52,53]. However, in our model, the ﬁnite memory
with which the scores are updated (i.e. the value of β< 1
in Eq. (13)) leads to a truncation of the s−3/2 beyond a
time τ0 ≃ 1/ log(1 − β). Without this truncation, the vol-
ume v(t) would never become a stationary process, i.e.
Cv(t, t′) would still depend on botht and t′at long times,
a phenomenon called ‘aging’ in the physics literature [54].
For ﬁnite τ0, one can show analytically that [39,19]:
Vv(t + τ,t )= Vv(τ) ∝
√
 τ
τ0
τ ≪ τ0. (39)
The formula given by equation (35), was found to repro-
duce very well the crossover f rom this exact short time
singular behaviour to the saturation regime.
The interesting conclusion is the following: the very
fact that agents compare the performance of two strategies
on a random signal leads to a multi-time scale behaviour
of the volume ﬂuctuations. This argument accounts very
accurately for our numerical data both for the Minority
Game and the present market model (see Fig. 9) [39,19],
and also reproduces quite well the empirical variogram of
activity in real markets [39].
5.2.2 Volume and volatility
Let us now discuss the relation between volume and
volatility. In real markets, the two are known to be corre-
lated; more precisely, it has recently been shown in [55]
that the long run correlations in volatility come from
the long range correlation in the volume of activity (see
also [56]). In our artiﬁcial market, a scatter plot of the
logarithm of the absolute return, log |r(t)| versus the vol-
ume of activityv(t) shows nearly no correlations when the
volume has small ﬂuctuations around its average value
 v,
but is strongly correlated withv(t)w h e nv(t)h a sl a r g ee x -
cursions above
 v. This means that periods of high activity
are also periods of large volatilities. One therefore expects
that the structure of temporal correlations of the volume
discussed above is also reﬂected in the volatility. If the
relation between |r(t)| and v(t) was linear, or weakly non
linear, one would in fact expect exactly the same shape
for the variogram. The fact that this relation is highly
non linear, i.e., nearly no correlations for v(t) ≈
 v,a n d
a roughly exponential relation for v(t) >
 v, adds an in-
stantaneous noise contribution proportional to 1 − δτ,0 to
the variogram of absolute returns, and leads to a strong
distortion of the shape of the relaxation. The fact that the
eﬀective power-law α, deﬁned in equation (37), is larger
for |r(t)| than for v(t) can be understood in details in the
context of the multifractal random walk model of Bacry
et al. [10].

434 The European Physical Journal B
1 10 100 1000 10000 10000 0
 Time lag
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
 Variogram
 Lux−Marchesi
 Absolute return variogram 
 Data (Lux−Marchesi)
 Random time shift mechanism
 Power−law fit, α=0.09
Fig. 11. Variogram of the absolute returns as a function of
the time lag in the Lux-Marchesi model with parameters as
in [32]. We compare with the ﬁt suggested by the random time
strategy shift mechanism (Eq. (35)) and a power-law ﬁt equa-
tion (37), as suggested by multifractal models [10]. Data: cour-
tesy of Thomas Lux.
5.2.3 Other mechanisms for long-ranged correlations
Recently, many agent based models have been proposed
to account for the stylized fa cts of ﬁnancial markets, in
particular volatility clustering and long range dependence
[31,32,37,57–60]. From the analysis of these models, one
can distinguish three main mechanisms for this long-range
dependence:
– Subordination of the strategies to performance. This
is the mechanism explained above: as soon as each
agent has diﬀerent strategie s with diﬀerent levels of
activities, and that the choice between these strate-
gies is subordinated to their performance, one expects
to see long range dependence of the type described
above, whenever these strategies lead to identical long
term performance. A similar mechanism is found in
the models of [32,57,58], where agents switch between
diﬀerent trading styles (e.g. fundamentalists/chartists)
as a function of their percei ved performance and of
herding eﬀects. The basic prediction of this scenario is
the short time square root singularity of the volume
variogram. This prediction is very well obeyed in the
Lux-Marchesi model, as shown in Figure 11.
– Subordination of the volatility to the price. In many
models, the level of activity depends on the diﬀerence
between the current price and a fundamental price. For
example, in the model cons idered by Bornholdt [59],
the volatility is a growing function of the absolute dif-
ference of these prices. In the model recently studied
by Alfarano and Lux [60], on the contrary, the volatil-
ity is a decreasing function of this diﬀerence. In these
models, the price is mean reverting toward the funda-
mental price. Calling y(t) = log( X(t)/Xf (t)), where
Xf is the fundamental price, a schematic equation for
y(t)i s :
dy
dt = −κy + σ(y)ξ(t), (40)
where ξ is a white noise and σ(y) a certain function.
The corresponding temporal correlation function of the
volatility can, for some speciﬁc forms of σ(y), be ex-
actly computed, and generically leads to a non expo-
nential decay that can mimic long term dependence.
Empirically, one can indeed detect, on the Dow Jones
index over a century, some correlation between the
volatility and the diﬀerence between the current level
and the average level of the index. However, we have
checked using empirical data that that volatility clus-
tering exists even when the level of market is neither
particularly overvalued nor undervalued.
– Heterogeneity of the agents time scales. Another mech-
anism, close in spirit to the ‘HARCH’ model [61] or
the cascade models proposed recently [9–13], comes
from the diﬀerent time horizons used by the agents
to set up their strategies. For example, in the model
of Raberto et al. [37], agents place orders at a distance
from the current price proportional to a sliding average
of the past volatility. The time scale used by the dif-
ferent agents is uniformly distributed between 10 day
and 100 days. Correspondingly, this induces a non ex-
ponential decay of the volatility correlation function
when τ ≤ 100.
All these three mechanisms are expected to play a role
in real markets. More precise statistical tests will hopefully
allow one to distinguish between them and estimate their
relative contribution to the long-range dependence eﬀects.
5.3 Crashes: the role of memory and the dynamical
freezing of the choice mechanism
We have also observed the following two interesting eﬀects
in the intermittent phase:
– The frequency of bubbles/crashes decreases when the
time horizon m of the strategies is increased.
– Just after a crash that follows a speculative bubble,
the volatility is anomalously small.
First, how do bubbles form in this intermittent regime?
The price ﬂuctuations are almost without correlations. In
this context it happens with probability 1/2m+1 that at a
certain time step the m-bit past price history is (1,1,....1)
and simultaneously the buying power of buyers is larger
than that of sellers. In this case, at the next time step the
price again increases and the past history is mapped onto
itself. Also, since g/λ is large, the price change is substan-
tial and the score of the buying strategies increases fast,
thereby creating a bubble that will terminate in the same
way as we described in Section 4. Thus, we expect an aver-
age frequency of 1/2m+1 for the bubble/crash occurrences,
which one can easily verify in our model.

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 435
The second question concer ns the period of very low
volatility which systematically follows the crashes. In our
simple model, we observe the presence of well deﬁned cy-
cles in the post-crash dynamics, which may vary for dif-
ferent numerical runs, but are identical for all the crashes
in the same simulation. The presence of these cycles obvi-
ously limits the amplitude of price ﬂuctuations and reduce
the volatility. Cycles occur because during the crash, the
scores of selling strategies suddenly accumulate a large ex-
cess and are thus used for some time after the crash irre-
spective of their more recent performance. Thus all agents
keep using the very same strategies. Since the number of
possible past histories is ﬁnite (2 m), the dynamics is de-
terministic and the system must enter a cycle.
Finally, let us mention what happens when tuning the
memory β of the scores update. In general we observe in
this regime an oscillatory transient before the intermittent
behaviour takes over, which lasts approximately 5000 time
units. At values of β very close to zero ( β ∼ 10−5), we
have observed longer transients eﬀects, while already for
β ∼ 10−4 we recover the usual dynamical trend. We have
also observed that small values of β tend to reduce the
number of occasional bubbles and crashes. This can be
explained by recalling the mechanism of bubble (crash)
formation. As described previously in this section, during
the intermittent dynamics bubbles are formed by appro-
priate statistical ﬂuctuations. However, in order for a bub-
ble to sustain in time, it is crucial that buying strategies
emerge as the best performing ones. When β is small the
performance of each strategy is evaluated on a very long
period and the recent past count relatively little. Thus
even the ﬂuctuations due to fundamentalist players may
change the performance balance and the bubble cannot
self-sustain.
6 Market eﬃciency and stability
6.1 Dynamical evolution of the parameters
and self-organization
As discussed above, our model ap r i o r iinvolves a large
number of parameters. However, the precise value of most
of them is not crucial. The only two important parameters
are the ratio g/λ, that measures the impact of trading on
prices, and P, that measures the tendency of the agents
for trend following ( P> 0) versus contrarian strategies
(P< 0). For small values of g/λ, the volatility of price
changes is very small, and, as we have discussed in section
4, bubbles form in such a way that very visible trends
appear. Furthermore, for small g/λ, these bubbles have a
very long lifetime. This means that the agents will nat-
urally increase the fraction of the wealth they invest in
this market, since the perceived risk is small. Henceg will
spontaneously increase. Simultaneously, small g/λ’s lead
to rather small execution rates: see Figure 4. Therefore,
the microstructure of the market will evolve such as to
make λ smaller, so that the market becomes more liquid.
Both eﬀects lead to an increase of the ratio g/λ,a n dt h e
corresponding destruction of clear trends. This scenario
therefore suggests that g/λ enters the intermittent region,
where the market becomes ‘quasi-eﬃcient’ ( i.e. returns
are uncorrelated on short time scales), but where interest-
ing statistical anomalies appear. The ratiog/λ then stops
growing, since the market becomes very volatile, without
clear trends. The agents therefore limit their investment.
The above scenario is somewhat related to that proposed
in the context of the Minority Game in [44]: increasing
the number of players leads to a more eﬃcient game, but
reduces the incentive for new players to enter, such as a
‘marginally eﬃcient’ state is reached.
T h er o l eo ft h ep a r a m e t e rP is quite interesting. If
agents were on average only slightly contrarian, the be-
haviour of the market would be completely diﬀerent, with
boring small mean reverting ﬂuctuations around the fun-
damental price, that we have here modeled as a determin-
istic growth Xf (t)=e x p (ρt). If this fundamental price
was itself randomly ﬂuctuating, our model market would
be very close to the standard ‘eﬃcient market’ picture,
where rational agents syste matically correct past excess
returns such as to lock the market price to the fundamen-
tal price. The fact that human psychology seems to favor
mimetic, trend following strategies seems to keep the mar-
ket in the intermittent region of the phase diagram shown
in Figure 2.
6.2 Distribution of agents’ wealth
We have also studied the distribution of the wealth of the
agents in our model. Interesting, for small values ofg,t h e
distribution is very uniform across agents: since the level
of speculative investment is small, the redistribution eﬀect
through trading dominates the random speculative gains.
When g increases, however, a Pareto like distribution of
wealth, with very unequal agents, sets in, as expected from
the analysis of [62].
6.3 The eﬀect of ﬁnite transaction costs
An interesting question in the context of ﬁnancial mar-
kets is to understand how the introduction of transaction
costs (as the Tobin tax for example) might stabilize the
behaviour of these markets. We have studied a generaliza-
tion of our model in which a non zero proportional fee is
paid at each transaction. As we shall see, this drives the
system toward a much more sta ble regime. Transaction
costs play a similar role to a negative polarization (more
contrarian) strategies.
The equations to be modiﬁed are the ones concerning
the update of cash, that accounts for the extra cost:
equation (12) is changed into:
Bi(t +1 )= Bi(t)(1 +ρ) − δφi(t)X(t +1 )
− ν|δφi(t)X(t +1 )|. (41)

436 The European Physical Journal B
0246 8
ν (%)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
T
g/λ=0.1
g/λ=0.005
01234
ν (%)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8 Active fraction
g/λ=0.75
Fig. 12. Evolution of the period T of the oscillations as a
function of the transaction cost parameter ν,f o rg/λ =0 .005
and g/λ =0 .1. Inset: Evolution of the fraction of active agents
as a function of ν for g/λ =0 .75.
Similarly, we adopt a modiﬁed update for the strategies
scores (see 13):
Sα
i (t +1 )=( 1 − β)Sα
i (t)
+ β (ϵα
i (It−1)[r(t) − ρ] − ν|ϵα
i (It−1)|) . (42)
Let us ﬁrst discuss the small g/λ regime, where bub-
bles appear in the absence of transaction costs. Scores
of the buying strategies grow most rapidly at the start
of the bubble, where the return r(t0) is maximum. When
the transaction costs are such thatν>r (t0) −ρ, the bub-
ble will never start. Since the initial growth of the bubble
is proportional to g/λ, we expect that bubbles are more
robust to costs for larger g/λ’s. If a bubble is formed, is
bound to collapse earlier for ν> 0, since the performance
of the buying strategy is systematically reduced. Hence the
frequency of the oscillations will increase withν.W es h o w
in Figure 12 that this is indeed the case. (Note however
that as ν increases, some bubbles do not form, and one
observes a mixed behaviour with on and oﬀ oscillations.)
In the intermittent phase, the introduction of transaction
costs favors the inactive strategy, and we observe a decay
of the average fraction of active agents asν increases (see
Fig. 12). Large values of transaction costs drive the system
toward a more stable regime, that still however exhibits
long-range volume ﬂuctuations of the type described in
the previous section.
The above discussion suggest s that transaction costs
would stabilize the markets. However, since the values of
g/λ that corresponds to realistic markets is rather large,
these costs would have to be substantial (a few percent per
trade) in order to really aﬀect the markets. This conclusion
could be read backward: a small tax, of the order of a
few basis points ( i.e. 10−4), would probably not change
dramatically the behaviour of markets, and would simply
add to already existing costs (brokerage, bid-ask spreads
and market impact). Of course, deﬁnite statements about,
say, the Tobin tax, would need a more realistic model.
7 Summary and conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a detailed study of a
rather complex market model, inspired from the Santa Fe
artiﬁcial market and the Minority Game. Agents have dif-
ferent strategies among which they can choose, according
to their relative proﬁtability, with the possibility of not
participating to the market. The price is updated accord-
ing to the excess demand, and the wealth of the agents is
properly accounted for. The set up of the model involves
quite a large number of parameters. Fortunately, only two
of them play a signiﬁcant role: one describes the impact of
trading on the price, and the other describes the propen-
sity of agents to be trend following or contrarian.
The main result of our study is the appearance of three
diﬀerent regimes, depending on the value of these two pa-
rameters: an oscillating phase with bubbles and crashes,
an intermittent phase and a stable ‘rational’ market phase.
The statistics of price changes in the intermittent phase
resembles that of real price changes, with small linear cor-
relations, fat tails and long range volatility clustering. We
have discussed how the time dependence of these parame-
ters could spontaneously lead the system in the intermit-
tent region. We have analyzed quantitatively the temporal
correlation of activity in the intermittent phase, and have
shown that the ‘random time strategy shift’ mechanism
proposed in an earlier paper [39] allows to understand
these long ranged correlations. Other mechanisms leading
to volatility clustering have been reviewed.
We have discussed several interesting issues that our
model allows to address, such as the detailed mechanism
for bubble formation and crashes, the inﬂuence of transac-
tion costs, the distribution of agents wealth, and the role
of a limited amount of capital on the long time ﬂuctua-
tions of the price.
Many extensions of the model could be thought of,
for example, the diversity of time horizons used by the
diﬀerent agents, the introduction of time dependent fun-
damental factors, or a larger number of tradable assets. A
more interesting path, in our mind, would be to simplify
the model suﬃciently as to be able to analytically predict
the phase diagram of Figure 2, and reach a similar level
of understanding as in the Minority Game (for some work
in this direction, see [36]).
We thank M. M´ezard, who participated to the early stages
of this work, for discussions. We have beneﬁted from many
conversations with S. Bornholdt, A. Cavagna, D. Challet,
D .F a r m e r ,T .L u x ,M .M a r s i l ia n dM .P o t t e r s .W et h a n k
Thomas Lux for providing some data on the Lux-Marchesi
model.

I. Giardina and J.-P. Bouchaud: Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent based market models 437
References
1. D.M. Guillaume, M.M. Dacorogna, R.D. Dav´ e, U.A.
M¨uller, R.B. Olsen, O.V. Pictet, Finance and Stochastics
1, 95 (1997)
2. R. Mantegna, H.E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econo-
physics (Cambridge University Press, 1999)
3. J.-P. Bouchaud, M. Potters, Th´eorie des Risques Fi-
nanciers (Al´ea-Saclay, 1997); Theory of Financial Risks
(Cambridge University Press, 2000)
4. For a review, see J.D. Farmer, Physicists attempt to scale
the ivory towers of ﬁnance ,i nC o m p u t .S c i .E n g i n e e r i n g ,
November 1999, reprinted in Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin. 3,
311 (2000)
5. A. Lo, Econometrica 59, 1279 (1991)
6. Z. Ding, C.W.J. Granger, R.F. Engle, J. Empirical Finance
1, 83 (1993)
7. R. Cont, M. Potters, J.-P. Bouchaud, Scaling in stock
market data: stable laws and beyond ,i n Scale invari-
ance and beyond , edited by B. Dubrulle, F. Graner, D.
Sornette (EDP Sciences, 1997); M. Potters, R. Cont, J.-P.
Bouchaud, Europhys. Lett. 41, 239 (1998)
8 .Y .L i u ,P .C i z e a u ,M .M e y e r ,C . - K .P e n g ,H . E .S t a n l e y ,
Physica A 245 437 (1997); P. Cizeau, Y. Liu, M. Meyer,
C.-K. Peng, H.E. Stanley, Physica A 245, 441 (1997)
9. A. Arn´eodo, J.-F. Muzy, D. Sornette, Eur. Phys. J. B 2,
277 (1998)
1 0 . J . - F .M u z y ,J .D e l o u r ,E .B a c r y ,E u r .P h y s .J .B17, 537
(2000); Physica A 299, 284 (2001)
11. S. Ghashghaie, W. Breymann, J. Peinke, P. Talkner, Y.
Dodge, Nature, 381 767 (1996)
12. B.B. Mandelbrot, Fractals and Scaling in Finance
(Springer, 1997)
13. A. Fisher, L. Calvet, B.B. Mandelbrot, Multifractality of
DEM/$ rates, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 1165
14. J.P. Bouchaud, M. Meyer, M. Potters, Eur. Phys. J. B13,
595 (1999)
15. J.-P. Bouchaud, A. Matacz, M. Potters, Phys. Rev. Lett.
87, 228701 (2001)
16. C. Hommes, Quantitative Finance 1, 149 (2001)
17. C. Chiarella, X-Z. He, Quantitative Finance 1, 509 (2001)
18. For an introduction and references, see the very interest-
ing book of R. Schiller, Irrational Exuberance (Princeton
University Press, 2000)
19. I. Giardina, J.P. Bouchaud,Proceedings of the Prague Con-
ference on Application of Physics to Economic Modelling,
February 2001,P h y s i c aA299, 28 (2001)
20. A. Beja, M.B. Goldman, J. Finance 35, 235 (1980)
21. R.G. Palmer, W.B. Arthur, J.H. Holland, B. LeBaron, P.
Taylor, Physica D 75, 264 (1994), see also B. LeBaron,
Quantitative Finance 1, 254 (2001)
22. W.B. Arthur, Am. Ec. Assoc. Papers Proc. 84, 406 (1994)
23. M. Levy, H. Levy, S. Solomon, Microscopic Simulation of
Financial Markets (Academic Press, San Diego, 2000)
24. D. Challet, Y.-C. Zhang, Physica A 246, 407 (1997)
25. P. Bak, M. Paczuski, M. Shubik, Physica A246, 430 (1997)
26. J.-P. Bouchaud, R. Cont, Eur. Phys. J. B 6, 543 (1998)
27. J.D. Farmer, Market Force, Ecology and Evolution ,e - p r i n t
adap-org/9812005, Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin. 3, 425 (2000)
2 8 . G .I o r i ,I n t .J .M o d .P h y s .C10, 149 (1999)
29. E. Samanidou, E. Zschischang, D. Stauﬀer, T. Lux, in Mi-
croscopic models for Economic Dynamics ,e d i t e db yF .
Schweitzer, Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer, Berlin,
2002)
30. D. Challet, M. Marsili, Y.-C. Zhang, Physica A, 276, 284
(2000). D. Challet, M. Marsili, R. Zecchina, Int. J. Theo.
Appl. Fin. 3, 451 (2000), Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 1824 (2000)
31. T. Lux, M. Marchesi, Nature 397, 498 (1999)
32. T. Lux, M. Marchesi, Int. J. Theo. Appl. Fin.3, 675 (2000)
33. J.D. Farmer, S. Joshi, J. Economic Behaviour and Organ-
isation, 49, 149 (2002)
34. P. Jeﬀeries, M. Hart, P.M. Hui, N.F. Johnson, Int. J. Theo.
Appl. Fin. 3, 443 (2000)
35. P. Jeﬀeries, N.F. Johnson, M. Hart, P.M. Hui, Eur. Phys.
J. B 20, 493 (2001)
36. M. Marsili, Physica A, 299, 93 (2001)
37. M. Raberto, S. Cincotti, S.M. Focardi, M. Marchesi, Phys-
ica A 299, 320 (2001)
38. J.V. Andersen, D. Sornette, preprint cond-mat/0205423
39. J.P. Bouchaud, I. Giardina, M. M´ezard, Quantitative Fi-
nance 1, 212 (2001)
40. A. Orl´ean, J. Economic Behavior and Organisation28, 257
(1995)
4 1 . J . - P .B o u c h a u d ,R .C o n t ,E u r .J .P h y s .B6, 543 (1998)
42. J.-P. Bouchaud, Quantitative Finance 1, 105 (2000)
43. A. Cavagna, Phys. Rev. E 59, R3783 (1999); A. Cavagna,
J.P. Garrahan, I. Giardina, D. Sherrington, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 83, 4429 (1999); J.P. Garrahan, E. Moro, D.
Sherrington, Phys. Rev. E 62, R9 (2000)
44. D. Challet, A. Chessa, M. Marsili, Y.C. Zhang, Quantita-
tive Finance 1, 168 (2001)
45. M. Marsili, R. Mulet, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, R. Zecchina,
Phys. Rev. Lett 87, 208701 (2001)
46. M. Marsili, D. Challet, Adv. Complex Systems 4,5
(2001)
47. V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, H.E. Stanley Phys.
Rev. E 66, 027104 (2002)
48. J.D. Farmer, F. Lillo, R. Mantegna, in preparation
49. J.P. Bouchaud, M. M´ezard, M. Potters, in preparation
50. V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L.A. Amaral, M. Meyer, H.E.
Stanley, Phys. Rev. E 60, 6519 (1999)
51. C. Godr`eche, J.M. Luck, J. Stat. Phys. 104, 489 (2001)
52. E. Sparre-Andersen, Math. Scand. 1, 263 (1953)
53. U. Frisch, in Scale invariance and beyond ,e d i t e db yB .
Dubrulle, F. Graner, D. Sornette (EDP Sciences, 1997)
54. for a review, see J.P. Bouchaud, L. Cugliandolo, J.
Kurchan, M. M´ezard, Out of Equilibrium dynamics in
spin-glasses and other glassy systems ,i n Spin-glasses and
Random Fields , edited by A.P. Young (World Scientiﬁc,
1998), and references therein
55. V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L.A. Amaral, X. Gabaix, H.E.
Stanley, Phys. Rev. E. 62, R3023 (2000)
56. G. Bonnano, F. Lillo, R. Mantegna, Physica A 280, 136
(2000)
57. M. Youssefmir, B. Huberman, J. Economic Behaviour and
Organisation 32, 101 (1997)
58. A. Kirman, Quarterly J. Economics 108, 137 (1993), and
in preparation
59. S. Bornholdt, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 12, 667, (2001)
60. S. Alfarano, T. Lux, working paper, WEHIA 2002
61. U.A. Muller, M.M. Dacorogna, R. Dav´e, R. B. Olsen, O.V.
Pictet, J. Empirical Finance 4, 213 (1997)
62. J.P. Bouchaud, M. M´ezard, Physica A 282, 536 (2000)
