Changing Neighborhoods–
Neighborhoods Changing
A Framework for Spatially Explicit
Agent-Based Models of Social Systems
David O’Sullivan
University of Auckland, New Zealand
The nature of urban neighborhoods, neighborhood effects, and the dynamics
of residential segregation are important themes in contemporary sociological
inquiry. Agent-based models of social systems have been widely applied in
this context. However, both applied and model-based research in these areas
suffer from weaknesses in underlying conceptualizations and representations
of spatial context. Drawing on human geography and the sociospatial per-
spective in urban sociology, a framework that enables richer and more realis-
tic representation of urban neighborhoods in agent-based simulation models
is proposed and outlined. The framework relies on a graph representation of
the spatial relations among spatial locations and can accommodate well-
deﬁned administrative zones, vague or ill-deﬁned neighborhoods, hierarchi-
cally nested spatial zoning systems, overlapping neighborhoods, and changing
relations among neighborhoods. Results from a preliminary application of the
framework demonstrate its utility and possibilities for research into the effects
of neighborhood structure on social processes.
Keywords: neighbourhoods; segregation; agent-based models; residential
location
R
ecent review articles attest to the importance for sociological inquiry of
three themes that are central to this article: the nature of urban neighbor-
hoods (Lamont and Molna´ r 2002), the impact of neighborhoods on social pro-
cesses (Sampson, Morenoff, and Gannon-Rowley 2002), and the dynamics of
residential segregation (Charles 2003). A fourth theme of this article has also
Sociological Methods
& Research
Volume 37 Number 4
May 2009 498-530
© 2009 SAGE Publications
10.1177/0049124109334793
http://smr.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
Author’s Note:The author wishes to thank Elizabeth Bruch and Nigel Gilbert, who have been
supportive throughout the long gestation of this article. Please address correspondence to David
O’Sullivan, School of Geography, Geology, and Environmental Science, University of Auckland,
Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand; e-mail: d.osullivan@auckland.ac.nz.
498

drawn increasing attention: agent-based models of social systems as a distinc-
tive, new research methodology in the social sciences (Macy and Willer 2002).
The intention of this article is to develop a framework for agent-based model-
ing of social systems thatenhances the potential of this new approach applied
to the study of neighborhoods, to neig hborhood impacts, and particularly to
residential segregation dynamics.
Recent work in agent-based modeling of social systems has seen the
growth and structure of social networks become important concerns (e.g.,
see Pujol et al. 2005; Robins, Pattison, and Woolcock 2005). This parallels
work in applied mathematics and physics on the properties of variously
structured graphs (Baraba´ si and Albert 1999; Watts and Strogatz 1998),
particularly those with the ‘‘small world’’ properties identiﬁed by earlier
work in the social sciences (Granovetter 1973; Milgram 1967). Work on
the evolution of social networks is tacit recognition in agent-based model-
ing of the impact of social structures on the behavior of social actors both
individually and collectively and represents something of a shift for an
approach otherwise dominated by methodological individualism (Conte
et al. 2001; O’Sullivan and Haklay 2000; Sawyer 2001, 2003).
While such changes are to be applauded, agent-based simulation work
on social networks generally continues to ignore another important aspect
of how social action is structured by its context—namely, geography. Net-
works and other social structures are embedded in geographical space in
ways that may strengthen some links and interactions while weakening
others. The potential importance of such effects has long been recognized
(again largely implicitly) in attempts to measure the social segregation
between groups based on income, class, ethnicity, or race (Duncan and
Duncan 1955; Jargowsky 1996; Massey and Denton 1988; Massey and
Eggers 1990; Quillian 1999; Reardon and Firebaugh 2002; St. John
and Clymer 2000). Segregation between groups is seen as potentially
problematic to the extent that it hinders the development of social connec-
tions between group members. However, measures of segregation often
ignore the geographic distributions of the population groups. This is dis-
guised by the reliance of most measures of segregation on population
count data aggregated to census units. While census units are spatially
deﬁned, so measures based on them appear inherently spatial, the relative
location of census units is not used in traditional measures of segregation.
Recently, this issue has begun to receive more attention. For example,
Grannis (1998) suggests that local street networks may be a more appro-
priate way to conceptualize neighborhoods and communities than census
units for many purposes, including the measurement of segregation.
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 499

Reardon and O’Sullivan (2004) propose an approach to measuring segre-
gation that relies on a user-speciﬁed proximity measurement across a
study area. Proximity between locations might be expressed in terms of
contiguity relations between census units, along street networks, or by
some other more or less complex composite measurement system. This
approach is a generalization of both traditional aspatial measures (Reardon
and Firebaugh 2002) and a variety of measures of spatial segregation sug-
gested over many years in geography (e.g., see Morrill 1991; White 1983;
Wong 1993, 2002)
The measurement of segregation reveals how space and geography are
often not thoroughly conceptualized in sociological studies and reﬂects a
tendency to see space as merely a container (or, with census units, a set of
containers) within which social processes play out. This might be charac-
terized as an ‘‘all the world’s a stage’’ view of social life—space is simply
a backdrop, or at most a frame of reference. The idea of space as a neutral
container is roundly rejected in contemporary human geography and,
increasingly, in social science more widely. In human geography, this ten-
dency emerged ﬁrst in the interrelated notions of cognitive maps and
behavioral geography (Golledge and Stimson 1997). The commonsense
view that people have internal representations of their environment and
that these affect their behavior was convincingly argued by urban planner
Kevin Lynch (1960) in his groundbreaking study of the ‘‘intelligibility’’
of urban places. Extensive work on cognitive mapping in planning and
psychology builds on these ideas (for a review, see Kitchin 1996). In this
article, the important point is that perceptions or representations of spatial
structure affect the behavior of agents acting in the spaces so perceived or
represented.
Of broader theoretical signiﬁcance for human geography was the
encounter in the mid-1980s between Anthony Giddens’s (1985) structura-
tion theory and Torsten Ha ¨ gerstrand’s (1970, 1982) time geography. In
time geography, the interaction of time and space in the daily routines of
individuals is recognized. A person cannot be in two places at once but
may have interrelated social rights, responsibilities, and obligations that
require presence in a number of places over the course of a day (or week,
month, year, or lifetime). Furthermore, details of the interaction between a
person’s daily routines in time and space—his or her life path—and the
life paths of others are important. Giddens explicitly relates structuration
theory to time geography, arguing that the spatial locations (locales)
where social activities occur are at once the outcome of social activities
and also inﬂuence those activities. In human geography, the idea of the
500 Sociological Methods & Research

locale as an emergent phenomenon has been applied at scales from the
personal to the regional (Thrift 1983). In parallel with these developments,
Marxist urban geography (Harvey 1982) and a ‘‘new’’ urban sociology
(Gottdiener 1994), drawing heavily on the work of Henri Lefebvre (1991),
developed similar conceptualizations of the active role of space in social
processes. These lines of thought in human geography highlight the fact
that human activities not only occur in space but are inﬂuenced by space
and at the same time produce and reconﬁgure space .
Recent work in sociology concerned with neighborhood effects (see the
review by Sampson et al. 2002; see also Dorling et al. 2001; McCulloch
2001) has some difﬁculty encompassing these perspectives on the role of
space. The phrase neighborhood effects betrays a tendency, methodologi-
cally at least, to treat neighborhood as just another variable. This assertion
may hold, even where the conceptualization of how neighborhoods have
effects is explicit and sophisticated about the multiple factors involved,
such as neighborhood ties, social control, access to institutional resources,
disorder, and so on. As Sampson et al. comment, ‘‘static models that esti-
mate the direct effect of current neighborhood context on a particular out-
come ... may be partitioning out relevant variance in a host of mediating
and developmental pathways of inﬂuence’’ (2002:469). Treating current
residential location as a proxy for neighborhood effects is tempting pre-
cisely because untangling causal connections between neighborhood and
individual-level outcomes is so difﬁcult. Sampson et al. again get to the
heart of the matter when they remark that
selection bias is probably the biggest challenge facing neighborhood-level
research. How do we know that the area differences in any outcome of inter-
est, such as adolescent delinquency, are the result of neighborhood factors
rather than the differential selection of adolescents or their families into cer-
tain neighborhoods? (2002:466)
Seen in this context, improved ways to dynamically represent neigh-
borhoods in models are a potentially important advance. Furthermore,
more sophisticated models of the residential sorting of households are an
important early application for such models. In this article I describe a fra-
mework that enables the inclusion of some of the foregoing complexities
into agent-based models of social systems. This framework takes its
inspiration from Schelling’s (1969, 1971, 1978) models of residential seg-
regation dynamics. While Schelling suggested two distinct approaches to
representing neighborhoods in models, only one of these has been widely
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 501

adopted in agent-based modeling work. Based on these discussions, I
brieﬂy outline some desirable characteristics for more general models of
urban neighborhood dynamics and propose a framework that can accom-
modate many of these characteristics and allows richer representations of
urban neighborhoods changed. I then present preliminary ﬁndings from a
simple, abstract residential segregation model, focusing on the effect of
progressively more complex types of neighborhood representation on
model outcomes. The results point to the importance of carefully consider-
ing the representation of neighborhoods during the development of any
agent-based model of urban neighborhood change. The article concludes
with a brief consideration of the prospects for further development of this
framework.
The Dual Nature of Neighborhoods
Neighborhoods have occupied a central place in urban sociology, from
Burgess (1925) and the Chicago School’s concentric rings and natural
areas, through Hoyt’s (1939) sectors, to the elaborations on these themes
that have followed (Harris and Ullman 1945; Mann 1965; White 1987).
Neighborhoods are also signiﬁcant to urban planners, particularly in the
work of Jane Jacobs (1961), whose paean to the joys of well-functioning
neighborhoods has been variously credited and blamed for the revitalized
neighborhoods produced by gentriﬁcation and the ‘‘new urbanism.’’ How-
ever, the vitality of the concept of the neighborhood is almost independent
of the difﬁculty of deﬁning the concept. Beyond a general notion that
neighborhoods are somewhat self-contained areas within a wider urban
environment, there is little agreement on a deﬁnition.
Paralleling the difﬁculties in deﬁning neighborhoods at any given time
is the challenge of understanding how neighborhoods change, especially
when more or less ﬁxed geographical neighborhoods undergo change over
time. As an example, the former working-class, inner-London neighbor-
hood of Islington was among the ﬁrst to undergo gentriﬁcation in the 1960s
(Glass 1964) and is now among the most celebrated (or decried, according
to taste) of upper-middle-class London neighborhoods. Is Islington now the
same place that it was then? In what sense has the identity of Islington been
preserved across 40 years of socioeconomic change? Even without delving
deeply into metaphysics, difﬁculties are apparent. These difﬁculties are a
product of the dual nature of neighborhoods, which are at once both more
or less well-deﬁned areas on the ground and rather ill-deﬁned regions
502 Sociological Methods & Research

characterized by their shared socioeconomic status or other characteristics.
It is an important premise of the framework proposed in this article that
both aspects of neighborhoods may change; that is, the deﬁnition of neigh-
borhoods on the ground may change at the same time as socioeconomic
attributes of neighborhoods are changing. Furthermore, the two processes
may be interrelated.
In spite of their resistance to clear deﬁnition, neighborhoods have unde-
niable impacts on the development of a city. Two spatial aspects can be
identiﬁed. First—and in most urban contexts the more important—is the
operation of residential and commercial property markets. The location of
a property is its most important attribute in a real estate market (‘‘Loca-
tion, location, location!‘‘). The most convenient shorthand for a property’s
location is its neighborhood, and it is clear that the neighborhood is used
to communicate much more than the location of the property. Everything
from the quality of schools to the quality of the coffee may be conveyed
to a prospective buyer by naming a neighborhood. Here, the uncertain
geography of neighborhoods—the fact that the location of a neighborhood
is largely perceptual—works to the beneﬁt of real estate agents, who may
push the boundaries of neighborhoods they are selling. We need not con-
sider neighborhoods as merely social constructs to agree that the role of
neighborhoods in deﬁning perceptions of land values is critical.
A second reason for the importance of neighborhoods is that they are fre-
quently a key scale at which government intervenes to effect urban change.
Prominent among recent examples are ‘‘area-based initiatives’’ in the Uni-
ted Kingdom (Painter and Clarence 2001) including Health Action Zones
(Bauld et al. 2005), Education Action Zones (Riley and Watling 1999), and
Employment Zones (Haughton et al. 2000). These examples attempt to pro-
mote larger scale change through local policy initiatives. An example
focused on effecting change at the neighborhood scale through policy at the
neighborhood scale is seen in a study of the effect of promoting homeow-
nership in poor urban neighborhoods (Cummings, DiPasquale, and Kahn
2001). Examples of such ‘‘policy neighborhoods’ ’ include electoral wards,
police precincts and districts, health districts, school zones, council areas,
and so on, with electoral redistricting as perhaps the clearest example of the
mechanisms by which such neighborhoods change.
The perceived neighborhoods of the real estate market and the sharply deli-
neated neighborhoods of policy makers are rarely the same, and further, these
two categories of neighborhood have rather different spatiotemporal proper-
ties. Real estate neighborhoods are ill deﬁned, may overlap, and may be subject
to relatively rapid change, especially intimes of intense development activity.
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 503

Policy neighborhoods, on the other hand,tend to be well deﬁned, are often non-
overlapping, and change less frequently. When policy neighborhoods do
change, they change instantaneously (at least conceptually) from one well-
deﬁned set of boundaries to another.
To make these ideas more concrete, these different types of neighbor-
hood are illustrated in the map in Figure 1, where the points are the address
locations from a university enrollment database with different symbols
showing the different suburbs identiﬁed by individual students. Four sub-
urbs, which we treat here as a proxy for neighborhoods, are present in this
map: one in the west (Suburb A, the open circles), one in the east (Suburb
B, the ﬁlled triangles), and two in the southwest and south central parts of
the map (Suburb C, ﬁlled circles, and Suburb D, open stars). The salient
detail about the distribution of the points is that suburbs are perceived as
overlapping to varying degrees. While Suburbs A and B are relatively dis-
tinct, with the open area (actually school grounds) to the west of center of
the mapped area serving to separate them, Suburbs C and D overlap signiﬁ-
cantly with one another as well as with Suburb A, which appears to be con-
sidered a larger and more generalized area than either C or D. By contrast,
an elementary school zone is shown shaded in grey. The boundaries of this
Figure 1
Perceptions of Neighborhood
Note: Four suburbs (neighborhoods) dominate this map of part of a city in New Zealand. Dif-
ferent point symbols codify suburb names as identiﬁed by a sample of households in record-
ing their home address. A single school zone is superimposed on the map shaded in grey.
504 Sociological Methods & Research

area are well deﬁned, following road centerlines. Notably, this zone encom-
passes places on the map that are considered by residents to belong to all
four of the named suburbs. Even this simple example strongly suggests the
complexity of perceptions of neighborhood.
Schelling’s Two Models of Neighborhood
Schelling’s (1969, 1971, 1978) models of residential segregation
dynamics are seminal examples of agent-based models in social science
(Macy and Willer 2002) and are a useful starting point both for exploring
the representation of neighborhoods in models and for developing models
of neighborhood dynamics. In Schelling’s models, two types of household
decide to relocate (or not) based on whether they are satisﬁed (or not) with
their current location. Dissatisfaction is a function of the numbers of neigh-
boring households of same and opposite types. This approach assigns a cen-
tral role to the neighborhood since decisions to leave one location and move
to another are based on the neighborhood characteristics of both locations.
From the current perspective, the most interesting aspect of Schelling’s
work is that he proposes two quite different models of the neighborhood
concept. In the continuous neighborhood , household decisions are made
with regard to adjacent locations on a lattice (a ‘‘checkerboard’’; see
Sakoda 1971). When households demand that some minimum fraction of
their neighbors be similar to themselves, with dissatisﬁed households relo-
cating, then segregation of the lattice into regions occupied exclusively by
only one household type occurs. The type of neighborhood embodied in
this model is a subjective or localized one, where each location is consid-
ered by households as belonging to its own particular neighborhood. Each
local neighborhood is similar (but not identical) to nearby local neighbor-
hoods since they overlap to the extent that immediately adjacent squares
in a grid share neighbors. For example, where local neighborhoods consist
of nine locations (the location itself, and four orthogonally and four diag-
onally adjacent locations), then orthogonally adjacent locations A and B
share six neighboring locations, while diagonally adjacent locations C and
D share four, as shown in Figure 2(i).
It is noteworthy that Schelling also refers to the continuous neighbor-
hood model as the ‘‘self-forming neighborhood’’ model (1978:147). This
usage refers to the major ﬁnding of his work with this model: that
extended regions occupied exclusively by one group form from the local-
ized behaviors of households. The ‘‘self-forming’’ coinage is interesting
because it relates indirectly to the way in which neighborhoods not only
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 505

affect human behavior but also to how changing perceptions of neighbor-
hoods may depend on the outcome of human behavior (in this case, their
sorting in space by race or class).
Schelling also explored the effect of different household tolerances in
two populations with respect to bounded neighborhoods. In this neighbor-
hood model (illustrated in Figure 2(ii)), each location belongs to one and
only one neighborhood so that a neighborhood is a ﬁxed container, or col-
lection of locations, with a given racial or ethnic mix at any point in time.
This is a direct counterpart to the census tract view of the neighborhood
implicit in traditional approaches to the measurement of segregation.
Using this model, Schelling examined the dynamics of neighborhood
change in terms of the entry and exit of households of different types and
Figure 2
Schelling’s (i) Continuous and (ii) Bounded Neighborhoods
Note: (i) Overlap of neighborhoods in the Schelling continuous neighborhood case. This type
of neighborhood is commonplace in contemporary agent-based and cellular modeling meth-
ods. (ii) Bounded neighborhoods imply that two locations in one neighborhood (X and Y)
share common neighbors, whereas a location in a different neighborhood (Z) has a comple-
tely different set of neighbors. Locations are indirectly neighbors to one another via their
common location inside a bounded neighborhood.
506 Sociological Methods & Research

showed that for many tolerance ratios between two groups, the only stable
neighborhoods are those with all the residents from only one group. Note
that Schelling considered a single bounded neighborhood in isolation, with
incoming and outgoing streams of households. In principle, it is straight-
forward to model several such neighborhoods with transfers among them,
which is presumably what Schelling envisaged as a more complete model
of urban residential dynamics.
How Neighborhoods Make a Difference to Models
Schelling’s work is compelling because it tells a believable story of
White ﬂight from the American inner city. In the bounded model, the
departure of a few less tolerant (or better resourced) households and their
replacement by different incomers leads to a tipping point beyond which
the neighborhood inexorably switches to one composed exclusively of the
incomers. This story coheres not only with oral histories of neighborhood
change in the United States (Suarez 1999) and casual observation but, on
a (perhaps) more hopeful note, with the dynamics of gentriﬁcation, when
wealthier incomers may presage inexorable revival, not decline. At the
same time, the continuous model places this explanation in a wider con-
text that accounts for the emergence of larger scale segregation across an
urban region.
However, Schelling’s models are so simple as to raise questions about
how well they portray the neighborhood dynamics of real cities. Recent
variations on the basic theme of the models raise interesting questions.
For example, extensions of the continuous space model have been devel-
oped involving extended household ‘‘vision’’ so that neighborhoods
become larger than the immediate four or eight neighbors of each checker-
board square. Laurie and Jaggi (2003) suggest that longer-range agent
vision leads not to more intense segregation (as suggested by Epstein and
Axtell 1996; Wassermann and Yohe 2001) but to stable mixed neighbor-
hoods. However, this is partly because with increasing household vision,
local neighborhoods represent larger samples of the whole urban area. For
initially random conﬁgurations, this means that neighborhoods become
more similar to one another so that unhappy households cannot ﬁnd any-
where ‘‘better’’ to live. Since everywhere is mixed, nowhere is better than
anywhere else for an intolerant household, and mixed neighborhoods (pre-
sumably of many unhappy households!) remain stable.
In a thorough exploration of the interaction of neighborhood size and house-
hold preference effects, Fossett and Waren (2005) show that Laurie and Jaggi’s
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 507

(2003) ﬁndings are of questionable relevance to real residential segregation
problems for two reasons. First, using a 50:50 split of households favors the
occurrence of stable mixed neighborhoods, beyond what is likely in real-world
contexts where small minority groups are more common. Second, and of more
relevance to this article, Fossett and Waren suggest that it is important that
‘‘speciﬁcations of [residential] search move away from idiosyncratic imple-
mentations used in the literature on agent-based modelling and towards forms
consonant with substantive theory and research on residential segregation’’
(2005:1899). Their research strongly suggests that if this is done then ‘‘the
impact of preferences on segregation becomes stronger and more robust and
interactions involving vision take on much less importance’’ (2005:1900). In
brief, the outcomes of residential segregation models may strongly depend on
the way that neighborhoods are conceptualized and represented.
It should be stated that empirical validation of Schelling’s models
remains elusive and a challenge for recent work in this vein. Clark (1991)
has shown that although Schelling’s hypothetical schedules of residential
preference for different neighborhood mixes do not accurately reﬂect sur-
vey response data from four U.S. cities, the implication of Schelling’s work
that stable mixed neighborhoods are unlikely in the U.S. context is consis-
tent with such data. It is also consistent with ﬁndings from more recent
work on individually expressed residential preferences (see Charles 2000).
More generally, opinions remain divided in the U.S. context as to which
of the residential preferences of Whites (for not ‘‘too many’’ Blacks) or of
Blacks (for more mixed neighborhoods) is the more important driver of
residential patterns that remain strongly segregated (Ihlanfeldt and Scaﬁdi
2004). It is clear, however, that incompatible neighborhood preferences of
different groups, given their relative numbers in the population, are an
important factor (Vigdor 2003). It is evident from Fossett and Waren’s
(2005) work in particular that how neighborhoods are perceived is of criti-
cal importance here because this is the context both for household evalua-
tions of their current and potential residential settings and for the
measurement of the segregation that may result.
Desiderata for Generalized Neighborhood Models
This article aims to present a framework for agent-based modeling of
social systems that allows richer, more satisfactory representations of the
complexity of neighborhoods and neighborhood relations. In this section,
desirable characteristics for such a framework are discussed, while keeping
in mind the foregoing discussion. This is not a complete list but focuses on
508 Sociological Methods & Research

geographical aspects of neighborhoods. Some signiﬁcant aspects of neigh-
borhoods not included in this list are brieﬂy discussed in the conclusion.
Neighborhoods at multiple scales. Neighborhoods exist at multiple
scales, from that of the immediate surroundings of a location—in an urban
context, the street—to larger formally and informally named areas in a city,
such as neighborhoods, precincts, school zones, local authorities, health
boards, and so on. In an urban context, at the largest scale we might con-
sider boroughs or cities within a metropolis, such as the ﬁve boroughs of
New York or the many cities of the Los Angeles region. In the urban resi-
dential case, it is clear that when considering a location, households attend
to both immediate (street-level) characteristics of a location as well as
neighborhood aspects (workplaces, schools, and services), regional scales
(local taxes), and ultimately national and global comparisons among differ-
ent cities. While it is tempting to see different scaled neighborhoods as
forming a nested hierarchy of one type of neighborhood within another, it is
important to realize that this will not be a good representation in all cases,
so any framework must be able to accommodate both hierarchical and non-
hierarchical cases.
Changing neighborhoods. Endowing neighborhoods with the ability to
change their constituent locations over time is desirable. As has been
noted, neighborhoods simultaneously are products of social processes and
inﬂuence the patterns of interaction of social processes. A modeling fra-
mework that allows for the emergence of neighborhoods in terms of which
locations belong to which neighborhoods—their ‘‘self-formation,’’ as
Schelling (1978:147) would have it—enhances considerably the potential
of agent-based models to represent real urban environments. Such a fra-
mework would see neighborhood structures and social processes coevol-
ving over time. Perhaps the best example to date of work in this style is
Axelrod’s (1997) model of cultural emergence, in which cultural groups
and the structure of relations among individuals interact.
Realistic geography. While the checkerboards of traditional agent-
based models have nice computational properties, it is likely that by gloss-
ing over aspects of the variation between real locations (e.g., relative
isolation) they inhibit understanding of urban neighborhood dynamics in
real cities. Urban models that develop these aspects of cellular models
have been presented (Benenson, Omer, and Portugali 2002; Flache and
Hegselmann 2001; O’Sullivan 2002; Semboloni 2000; Shi and Pang
2000). While it remains poorly understood how the geographical structure
of urban environments can affect the dynamics of social processes, it is
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 509

desirable that modeling frameworks enable exploration of these aspects.
The contemporary, widespread availability of geographically explicit data
in various geographic information system (GIS) formats makes this desi-
deratum of potentially even greater value since it would enable an easier
transition from abstract theoretical models used for exploration and theory
building across to applied real-world models used to inform policy choices
and planning.
Distinct and vague neighborhoods. As noted above, some neighbor-
hoods are vaguely deﬁned, while others are unambiguous. A model frame-
work encompassing well-deﬁned administrative neighborhoods (similar to
the bounded neighborhood model) and ill-deﬁned neighborhoods (similar
to the continuous or other models) across a range of scales is desirable. A
framework capable of representing both types of neighborhood could
enable exploration of the interactions between these two types of geo-
graphic entity.
Feedback from neighborhoods to household characteristics. Finally,
the possibility that residence in a neighborhood or location might affect
the behavior of households, or at least some characteristics of households,
would be welcome. Work on the interactions of Israelis and Arabs in Tel-
Aviv (Benenson 1999; Portugali, Benenson, and Omer 1994, 1997) has
developed this idea in the context of residential segregation by allowing
the out-of-group tolerance of households to change in response to shared
residence over time with households not of their own group or who are
more (or less) tolerant. Such effects are relatively easy to incorporate into
agent-based models by having the behavioral attributes of agents (e.g.,
their tolerance of difference) change over time dependent on their neigh-
bors. Development of this aspect of simulation models will be critical to
their usefulness for exploring neighborhood effects since it is precisely the
way that local behavioral norms may diverge from global norms that is
central to many posited effects.
Proposed Model Framework
I now outline a framework that accommodates the ﬁrst four of the
above characteristics, while leaving open the ability to incorporate the
ﬁfth over time. This model builds on an earlier model (O’Sullivan,
Macgill, and Yu 2003), which I brieﬂy outline ﬁrst. That model was a
hierarchical version of the Schelling model, combining his two
510 Sociological Methods & Research

neighborhood types. Household agents examine both immediately neigh-
boring households in a lattice of residential locations (the continuous
neighborhood) but also consider the aggregate nature of the bounded
neighborhood (or district) containing their residential location. The model
thus consists of a number of bounded neighborhoods, each containing a
number of residential locations at points on a lattice, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 3. Note that the grid structure is for convenience of illustration only,
and arbitrary geographies might be used for both locations and districts, as
in Figure 4.
Formally, this model consists of two graphs, with GL containing loca-
tions where household agents may reside and GD containing districts.
Each graph consists of two sets, one of vertices representing the entities it
contains (i.e., locations or districts) and one of edges representing the rela-
tions between those objects. Thus, we have
Figure 3
Model of Hierarchical Bounded Neighborhoods
Structure of the simple hierarchical Schelling model. Small grid cells are residential locations
with a continuous neighborhood structure. Large cells are bounded neighborhoods, whose
aggregate state is also considered by agents in residential decision-making behavior. Arrows
show relations inﬂuencing decision-making. Household A, at the centre of a bounded neigh-
borhood is affected by immediately neighboring agents, and by the aggregate state of the
containing bounded neighborhood. Household B, at the edge of its containing bounded neigh-
borhood, is affected by neighbors both inside and outside the bounded neighborhood, but
only by the containing bounded neighborhood.
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 511

GL = ðVL, ELÞ and GD = ðVD, EDÞ, ð1Þ
with the vertex sets deﬁned as
VL = f11 ... lng and VD = fd1 ... dng, ð2Þ
where li and di denote locations and districts, respectively. The edge sets
are then
EL = fhlilj i : li, lj ∈ VLg and ED = fhdidj i : di; dj ∈ VDg: ð3Þ
Figure 4
Example of an Alternative Model of Neighborhood Boundaries
Note: The hierarchical Schelling model in a real setting. Census tracts (hollow black outlines)
contain block groups (grey ﬁlled white outlines). Focusing on interrelationships in the south-
east corner of the map, tract A may be affected by events in neighboring tracts B through D,
or by block groups 1 through 4, which it contains. Block group 1 (shaded darker grey) is
directly affected by neighboring block groups 2 through 4 (in the same tract), and by block
groups 5 and 6 in adjacent tract D. It is also affected by the overall state of its tract A, and,
less directly, by block groups in tracts B through D.
512 Sociological Methods & Research

In addition to these two graphs, the containment relationships between
districts and locations may be considered a subset of the cross product of
the two vertex sets. That is,
EDL ⊂ VD × VL: ð4Þ
All relations in the graph are binary; that is, they exist or they do not.
Furthermore, while the formalism is presented here as a graph partitioned
into two vertex sets, the formalization generalizes to a partitioning of the
graph into any arbitrary (integer) number of vertex sets, and these need
not necessarily be hierarchically nested. Details of this formalism are set
out in the context of cellular models by O’Sullivan (2001) and are closely
related to geo-algebra (Takeyama 1997; Takeyama and Couclelis 1997).
Extending this hierarchical spatial model to allow for bounded neigh-
borhoods whose constituent locations change over time is simple. Instead
of binary edges relating locations and districts, the formal model remains
as above, with the addition that a weight or value is associated with each
graph edge. This minor change to the model structure has far-reaching
implications. Varying strengths of relationships between locations,
between districts, and between districts and locations can be represented.
For example, marginal locations on the edge of a district can be repre-
sented as members of a district with only a weak membership relationship.
Furthermore, if agent actions are allowed to affect edge weights, then
weights can change to represent changing neighborhood relationships. For
example, based on continuous similarity in their social mix over a period
of time, two locations initially considered to be in different neighborhoods
may come to be considered in the same neighborhood. This possibility is
explored in the model presented in the remainder of this article. Note also
that in well-deﬁned neighborhoods, location-to-district membership edge
weights can remain binary with values limited to either 0.0 (not a mem-
ber) or 1.0 (a member) only.
An Example Implementation
In this section, I present results based on the above framework that
demonstrate the effect of successively incorporating more complex neigh-
borhoods into a simple model implemented in NetLogo (Wilensky 1999).
I note from the outset that these results are preliminary in nature and are
intended only to show how the ways in which neighborhood concepts are
represented in models may affect the outcomes. More complete results
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 513

from this model will be presented elsewhere. In this article, the intention
is merely to demonstrate that exploration of the impacts on model out-
comes of how neighborhoods are perceived and represented is a fruitful
avenue for further research.
The elements of the model are as follows:
A. Spatial structure consists of a 36 × 36 lattice of locations with a Moore
neighborhood topology, so that each location is linked to its 8 closest
other locations as neighbors, with an initial link weight of 1. The lattice
is nontoroidal, so edge and corner locations have only 5 and 3 neighbor-
ing locations, respectively.
B. Temporal update occurs in ‘‘rounds’’ whereby each household taken in
random order is given an opportunity to exit the model (see F below)
and be replaced by a new entrant household. New entrant households
choose a location as outlined in G below. At the end of a full round of
exits and entries to the model, link weights between locations may be
adjusted (see H), and the assignment of locations to districts may change
(see I).
C. Agents in the model each represent a single household. Households are
of two types, red and blue, and each exclusively occupies a location.
Households exit the model and new households enter as described in F
and G below.
D. Locations are vacant or contain a household agent. Location-to-location
neighborhood relations (‘‘links’’) in the lattice are initially full strength,
with a weight of 1. In some model runs, a minimum link weight para-
meter, wmin (0 ≤ wmin ≤ 1), allows the weight associated with a link to
vary in the range wmin to 1. This occurs based on the history of occupation
of neighboring locations by households (see H below). For each location,
a continuously updated record is maintained of a total weighted count of
households of each type (red and blue) that occupy neighboring locations.
Where link weights are 1, this is equivalent to a simple count of reds and
blues. When link weights vary, households of each type on neighboring
locations are summed according to the associated link weights.
E. Districts are composed of nonoverlapping subsets of all the locations in
the model. In a model run, an initial assignment of locations to districts is
made whereby a larger scale grid of districts is superimposed on the loca-
tions. Districts may consist of 4 × 4, 6 × 6, or 9 × 9 square blocks of loca-
tions (other assignments are possible but not considered here). All
location-to-district assignments are binary, as discussed in the previous
section. Over time, locations may switch from one district to another
514 Sociological Methods & Research

based on the relative total weights of their links to locations that are mem-
bers of their own and neighboring districts. The mechanism by which this
occurs is discussed in I below. Districts maintain a count of the total num-
ber of households of each type occupying their constituent locations.
F. Household exit from the model occurs randomly but is biased by the
household composition of the continuous and bounded neighbourhoods
of the household. Households are considered for exit from the model in
random order, and they exit with probability p, determined according to
a logistic function,
pðCÞ = 1
1 + ek − rC , ð5Þ
where
k is a chosen to set a baseline probability p0 of exit when C = 0: In the runs
considered here, for a baseline probability of exit of .05, k = 2:944439.
r is a ‘‘movement-bias’’ parameter that controls the sensitivity of the
response of p to changing neighbourhood composition, C.A t r = 0,
neighborhood composition has no effect on p, and all households may
exit the model with equal probability. In the model runs considered here,
r is set greater than 0 so that p is a nondecreasing function of C.
C is a value between 0 and 1, representing the composite, continuous, and
bounded neighbourhood composition. C for a household is calculated by
determining CD, the fraction of occupants of the containing district that
are of opposite type to the household, and CL, the fraction of the
weighted sum of occupants of neighboring linked locations that are of
opposite type to the household. These fractions are combined to into a
composite composition C according to
C = ð1 − bLDÞCL + bLDCD, ð6Þ
where bLD is a location-district balance factor between 0 and 1, which
controls the relative importance of immediate continuous neighborhoods
relative to bounded neighborhoods. With bLD = 0 only the continuous
neighborhood composition affects household decisions to exit the model,
while with bLD = 1 only the district composition affects decisions to
exit.
The overall effect of these mechanisms is that households choose to
leave the model with a probability that is greater (for r> 0) when there
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 515

are more households of opposite type in their continuous and bounded
neighborhood. This is ana logous to typical Schelling model formulations
but is preferred here because it allows an underlying base rate of exit to
be combined with exit conditional on neighborhood composition. In the
example runs reported here, the movement-bias parameter, r,w a ss e tt o
2.5 or 5 in most cases so that households with C = 1 have a probability
of exit of approximately .39 or .89, respectively.
G. New household entry occurs when an existing household exits the
model. A new entrant household is assigned a color at random depend-
ing on a model parameter controlling the composition (in terms of the
mix of reds and blues) of new entrants to the model. Combined with
the exit process, this allows exploration of scenarios such as a starting
composition with a 10/90 mix of reds and blues transitioning to a 25/75
mix. This is more satisfactory than the rather constrained setting in
many segregation models in which a ﬁxed composition mix is shufﬂed
until it settles. New entrants locate at an available vacant location by
selecting a random set of vacant locations of a speciﬁed size A (in
model runs A = 5, typically) and locating in the location with the low-
est composition C, calculated as described in F above. Where two or
more locations have identical C, the preferred location is selected at
random.
With appropriate parameter settings, the model as described so far
behaves similarly to many abstract re sidential segregation models, as is
shown in Experiments 1 and 2 in the Experiments and Results section.
Two further processes in the model begin to implement the more com-
plex representation of neighborhood s discussed in the ﬁrst half of this
article:
H. Continuous neighborhood update is represented by allowing the weights
of neighborhood links between locations to vary between some deﬁned
lower limit wmin and 1. Changes to link weights are calculated after each
round of household relocations by examining the recent history of loca-
tion occupancy over the previous Th rounds of the model. Location occu-
pancy is recorded as a list of values from the set f−:5, 0, :5g, which
represent respectively red, vacant, and blue occupancy. The difference
between linked locations is then calculated as the average of the absolute
difference between the locations over the previous Th rounds. Subtract-
ing this value from 1 yields a new current relative link weight, which is
516 Sociological Methods & Research

then rescaled to a value between wmin and 1 to arrive at a new value for
the weight of the link. Thus,
wij ðt0Þ = wmin + ½1 − wmin/C138 · 1 − 1
Th
Xt0 − 1
t = t0 − Th
jviðtÞ − vj ðtÞj
"#
, ð7Þ
where vi(t) and vj(t) are the occupant values at linked locations i and j at
time t, and Th is the time period over which a history of occupancy is
retained. For low values of Th, the link between locations with different
types of occupant will weaken rapidly or, conversely, strengthen rapidly
with similar occupants. For high values of Th, such changes will occur
more slowly.
I. Bounded neighborhood update is associated with changes in continuous
neighborhoods. At the end of each round of relocations, and following
any changes to link weights, membership of locations in districts may
change. This occurs where the total weight of links a location has to loca-
tions in any other district is greater than the total weight of links to loca-
tions inside its current district. In such a case, a location switches to the
district with which it is most strongly linked. Where a location is equally
strongly linked to two or more districts, it switches districts to one of
those districts selected at random.
Experiments and Results
In this section, preliminary results from some simple experiments are
reported. It must again be emphasized that the purpose of these experi-
ments is to demonstrate basic features of the model, focusing in particular
on the effects of features introduced in E, H, and I. A summary of the
parameter settings for the experiments is shown in Table 1.
Experiment 1: Simple Segregation Behavior
First, we establish that the behavior of the model is similar to other
residential segregation models. Results from multiple runs ( n = 50) of the
model for a range of values of the movement-bias parameter r with ﬁxed
new entry attempts ( A = 5), and for a range of values of the new entry
attempts parameter A for ﬁxed movement bias ( r = 2:5), are shown in
Figure 5. These graphs show increases over 100 rounds of household exit
and entry for a standardized measure of the fraction of like neighboring
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 517

Table 1
Summary of Model Parameter Settings in Experiments
Experiment
Parameter 1 2 3 4 Notes
Location-district balance, bLD N/A N/A .5 .5 Varies local versus district-level behavior
Bounded neighborhood sizes N/A 4 × 4, 6 × 6, 9 × 9 6 × 66 × 6 Initial district sizes only
Baseline probability of exit .05 .05 .05 .05 Set by adjusting the k parameter in equation (8)
Movement bias, r 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2.5, 5, 10, 20 2.5 2.5 5 Affects probability of exiting the model as in equation (8)
Move attempts, A 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20 5 5 5 High values make new entrant households more selective
Location history, Th N/A N/A 2, 5, 10, 20 5 Time period over which location occupancy is compared
to adjust link weights
Minimum link weight, wmin N/A N/A 0, .1, .25 .1 Lower values increase the effect of changing link weights
over time
District update N/A N/A Off Off, On
Vacancy rate .1 .1 .1 .1
Fraction red, pR(0) .5 .5 .5 .1
Entrant fraction red, pR .5 .5 .5 .25
Note: Settings that vary are indicated in bold.
518

households in each household’s continuous neighborhood. If nR and nB
are the numbers of red and blue households in the model, then the
expected value of the average fraction of like neighbors, E(plike), is
EðplikeÞ = nR
nR + nB
· nR − 1
nR + nB − 1 + nB
nR + nB
· nB − 1
nR + nB − 1 : ð8Þ
If the simple average fraction of like neighbors of households is plike, then
a simple standardized measure of segregation in the model is given by
s = Plike − EðplikeÞ
1 − EðplikeÞ : ð9Þ
Clearly, the model produces rapid segregation of households. One dif-
ference from more standard segregation models is notable. Segregation
proceeds to very high values since there is a continuing segregation pres-
sure, even when the model is already strongly segregated. This differs
from models in which households stop relocating once satisﬁed, resulting
in a relationship between the intolerance of households and ﬁnal patterns
of segregation. Lower levels of segregation in the long run for this model
occur only when new entrant households are not selective about their
Figure 5
(i) Movement-Bias Parameter r With Fixed New Entry Attempts and
(ii) New Entry Attempts Parameter A for Fixed Movement Bias
Note: The effects of changing movement-bias and the number of attempts to locate on time
series evolution of standardized segregation averaged over 50 runs of the model. In (i)
attempts was held ﬁxed at 5, and values of 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2.5, 5, 10 and 20 were applied. In
(ii) movement-bias was held ﬁxed at 2.5, and values of 1, 2, 3, 5, 10 and 20 were applied.
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 519

location, as occurs when the number of new locations considered is set to
1. In this case, new entrants effectively locate at random, and segregation
is due solely to the movement-bias parameter, making it more likely that
households will exit from locations where there are many households of
different types.
Experiment 2: Varying District Size
Next, we vary the size of districts in the model and the location-district bal-
ance factor, bLD, to see how these affect outcomes measured in terms of the
segregation measure, s. Results are shown in Figure 6. The effects here are
more complex. Figure 6(i) shows, for a ﬁxed district size of 6 × 6 locations,
changes in a standardized segregation time series asbLD is varied from purely
local behavior (bLD = 0) to strongly district-level behavior (b LD = :9). This
changes both the shape of the time series and its ﬁnal value. Initial segregation
occurs more rapidly as the district-scale behavior becomes stronger because
many households in mixed districts choose to exit the model. Also with stron-
ger district-level behavior, segregation tends to settle on a ﬁnal lower value
before 100 time steps have elapsed. Withpurely local behavior, there is still a
clear upward trend in segregation even after 100 time steps. This difference is
Figure 6
Changes in (i) District-Level Behavior and (ii) District Size Over Time
Note: Effects of introducing districts (bounded neighborhoods) on time series evolution of
segregation (averaged over 30 runs of the model). (i) as the district-level behavior of house-
holds increases ( bLD = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9), segregation occurs more rapidly, but stabilizes
sooner and at a lower level. (ii) smaller district sizes result in lower segregation as measured
by s (see text).
520 Sociological Methods & Research

because districts tend to ‘‘ﬁx’’ the two different types of households in different
regions of the model, leading to reduced rates of exit and entry, whereas with
low attention to the districts there is a continuous pressure to segregate further.
In Figure 6(ii), the effect of different sizes of districts is shown whenbLD = :5.
Smaller districts allow different typeso fh o u s e h o l d st or e m a i na sn e i g h b o r s
across district boundaries over time and thus produce lower levels of the local
segregation measure,s. As districts become larger, the number of local neigh-
bors affected by district boundaries falls and higher measured levels of segre-
gation occur.
Experiment 3: Changing Local (Continuous) Neighborhoods
Next, we introduce varying link weights (see H above). Two para-
meters govern the operation of this effect: the minimum possible link
weight between locations, wmin, and the location history, Th, which con-
trols the speed at which link weights adjust to persistent similarity or dif-
ference in the household types that occupy linked locations. The
important point here is that the underlying segregation behavior of the
model is robust to these parameters, although introducing varying model
structures affects measurement of segregation, necessitating the use of dif-
ferent measures in the next experiment. Results in Figure 7, averaged over
30 runs of the model based on both the standardized local segregation
measure s and the dissimilarity index D of segregation (see Reardon and
Firebaugh 2002), are shown for 60 time steps of the model. The s measure
shows distinct kinks in its initial evolution, which result from a burn-in
period in which link weights adjust from their initial value of 1 to a range
of values between wmin and 1. The location history length Th (set to 5, 10,
20) is clearly visible in these time series. The D measure shows no such
effect since it does not depend on the link weights. Signiﬁcantly, both
measures clearly indicate that segregation, however it is measured, is
robust to the introduction of adjustable link weights, as we might expect,
although it is apparent that in a model with a changing spatial structure
the measurement of segregation over time is problematic.
Experiment 4: Neighborhoods as Emergent and Changing Entities
Finally, we enable updating of the constituent locations of each district
(see I above) and observe the effects of this on a transition from an initially
random system composition with 10 percent red households to one in which
the incoming stream of households is composed of 25 percent red
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 521

households. We expect, in time, to see a relatively stable system composi-
tion with 25 percent red households and, based on the previous experi-
ments, strong segregation between red and blue areas in the model. The
point of interest here is how the model’s path toward this state differs when
districts can change their constituent locations compared to when they can-
not. Two single-model runs with the same initial conﬁguration of locations
were carried out, with district updating turned off and then turned on, and
other parameters set as detailed in Table 1. As is clear from Experiment 3,
measures of segregation are not necessarily useful to track these scenarios
because segregation is a robust effect and because the changing spatial
structure of the model makes measurement of segregation over time proble-
matic. Instead, we track the proportion of red households in the model over-
all and in each district and also a count of the number of districts in which
the proportion of red households is 95 percent or greater.
Figure 8 shows results for a single pair of model runs. In Figure 8(i), with-
out district updating, progress toward an overall 25 percent red composition
occurs by a series of initially rapid invasions of districts that switch to 100
percent red. By Time Step 20, 4 districts are completely red in composition.
Figure 7
Changes in Segregation Over Time
Note: Effects of introducing location history and variable link weights on measurement of
segregation by s and D. Location history and min link weights were varied over the ranges of
values shown in table 1.
522 Sociological Methods & Research

Two more districts switch in the next 40 time steps, and 2 more districts
switch by 100 rounds of exit and entry, making 8 in total. The overall pro-
portion of red households in the model does not reach 25 percent during this
time frame (recall that there are 36 districts in the model, so 9 red districts
would be required). This pattern of initial rapid invasions at progressively
greater time intervals is typical. As the model segregates into solidly red
Figure 8
Segregation Over Time (i) Without and (ii) With District Updating,
(iii) Final Distribution of Households and District Boundaries, and
(iv) Neighborhood Link Weights
Note: (i) and (ii) show time series evolution of the proportion of red households for 36 dis-
tricts and overall, along with a count of the number of districts with > 95% red households.
(i) is with no update of constituent locations in districts, and (ii) is with update. (iii) shows
the ﬁnal map of the distribution of red (shown in black) and blue (shown in grey) households,
and the boundaries of the six districts with large proportions of red households. (iv) shows
the ﬁnal conﬁguration of the neighborhood links with link strength from white (minimum) to
black (strongest).
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 523

and blue districts, the probability of sufﬁcient vacancies occurring in a blue
district for an inﬂux of red households to switch it falls, and growth in the
overall proportion of red households slows.
In Figure 8(ii), results are shown for the same starting conﬁguration
with district updating enabled. Here, something different happens. Again,
initially several rapid invasions occur, with ﬁve districts switching to red
during the ﬁrst 20 rounds of exits and entries. After 60 rounds, another dis-
trict has switched; however, by this time, some districts are shrinking
rapidly (see Figure 9), and this district reverts to zero presence of red
households soon after. Even so, the proportion of red households overall
continues to increase because some of the high-proportion red districts are
growing. This run of the model makes greater progress toward a 25 percent
overall proportion of red households (albeit by a small margin), even
though after 100 rounds of exits and entries there are only six districts with
a high proportion of red households. Thus, the inﬂux of reds is accommo-
dated not by successive switching of a ﬁxed set of neighborhoods but by
growth in districts themselves. Figures 8(iii) and 8(iv) show the ﬁnal distri-
bution of households, district boundaries, and neighborhood link weights
Figure 9
Change in District Size and Composition Over Time
Note: Evolution of district sizes for the same model run as in 8(ii). The heavy lines are the
districts with a high proportion of red households.
524 Sociological Methods & Research

in the model and together with Figure 9 demonstrate how changing district
shapes become an important factor in the model.
Discussion and Conclusion
As has been noted, Fossett and Waren (2005) offer a more substantive
investigation of the behavioral characteristics of Schelling-type models.
The work reported here is concerned primarily with the methodological
issue of how neighborhoods are represented in simulation models of social
systems. Nevertheless, even the preliminary results presented here conﬁrm
that how neighborhoods are represented in models, how they are perceived
or acted on by agents, and how and whether the spatial structure of neigh-
borhoods changes over time may all affect the dynamics and ﬁnal outcomes
of a model. This reinforces the point made by Fossett and Waren that the
bounded neighborhood concept is extremely important to the development
of more convincing models of residential segregation and relocation beha-
vior than has been typical in the agent simulation literature. While Fossett
and Waren conform to previous usage in referring to bounded vision, these
results suggest that it may be more useful to think in terms of household
perceptions of neighborhood. In particular, a richer range of representations
of neighborhood is necessary than the by now classic checkerboard view
with continuously varying neighborhoods locally perceived by agents.
In this article, I presented a framework for richer representation of
neighborhoods in agent-based models. The framework can accommodate
neighborhoods at multiple scales, neighborhoods that are both well and ill
deﬁned, neighborhoods that are either hierarchically nested or that over-
lap, and neighborhoods embedded in the real geography of streets, land
parcels, and so on, as required. These capabilities still leave out much of
the complexity of real neighborhoods. In the example model presented, all
households perceive the neighborhood structure to be the same. While it is
easy to imagine incorporating misperception by agents of a notional
‘‘real’’ neighborhood structure into a model, and somewhat more difﬁcult
but still possible to envisage each agent with its own version of the neigh-
borhood structure, this would be computationally challenging for the
model in its current form. This framework could also accommodate a
number of different topologies of relation between both spatial locations
or between agents (such as a social network). It also remains an open
question whether the net effect of incorporating all these aspects would be
to average things out to a situation akin to much simpler models.
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 525

Notwithstanding these omissions, a simple model adopting the proposed
framework has been developed that introduces high-level districts (bounded
neighborhoods) that change in the simulated space in response to changes in
the locations of households. While thisis a simpler change conceptually than
either individualized perceptions or multiple topologies, even this change turns
a relatively simple model into a formidably complex entity whose analysis pre-
sents signiﬁcant methodological challenges—as is clear from Experiment 4 in
the previous section. When both the locations of households and the structure
of the neighborhoods in which households reside are subject to change over
time, measures and statistics that separate the two are difﬁcult to devise. Of
course, this is precisely the methodological challenge faced in the context of
investigations of neighborhood effects in empirically based studies of real
cities. As such, while the proposed framework presents signiﬁcant challenges
to sociologists and others working withagent-based models of social systems,
it may also enhance prospects for pr oductive exchange between research
founded on abstract simulation models and more grounded and concrete inves-
tigations of real sociospatial change.
References
Axelrod, Robert M. 1997. ‘‘The Dissemination of Culture: A Model With Local Convergence
and Global Polarization.’’Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 41:203-26.
Baraba´ si, Albert-La´ szlo´ and Re´ ka Albert. 1999. ‘‘Emergence of Scaling in Random Net-
works.’’Science 286:509-12.
Bauld, Linda, Ken Judge, Marian Barnes, Micahela Benzeval, Mhairi MacKenzie, and Helen
Sullivan. 2005. ‘‘Promoting Social Change: The Experience of Health Action Zones in
England.’’Journal of Social Policy 34:427-55.
Benenson, Itzhak. 1999. ‘‘Modeling Population Dynamics in the City: From a Regional to a
Multi-Agent Approach.’’Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society 3:149-70.
Benenson, Itzhak, Itzhak Omer, and Juval Portugali. 2002. ‘‘Entity-Based Modeling of Urban
Residential Dynamics: The Case of Yaffo, Tel Aviv.’’ Environment and Planning B:
Planning & Design 29:491-512.
Burgess, Ernest W. 1925. ‘‘The Growth of the City.’’ Pp. 47-62 inThe City, edited by Robert
E. Park, Ernest W. Burgess, and Roderick D. McKenzie. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Charles, Camille Zubrinsky. 2000. ‘‘Residential Segregation in Los Angeles.’’ Pp. 167-219 in
Prismatic Metropolis: Inequality in Los Angeles , edited by Lawrence D. Bobo, Melvin L.
Oliver, James H. Johnson, and Abel Valanzuela Jr. New York: Russell Sage.
———. 2003. ‘‘The Dynamics of Racial Residential Segregation.’’ Annual Review of Sociol-
ogy 29:167-207.
Clark, William A. V. 1991. ‘‘Residential Preferences and Neighborhood Racial Segregation:
A Test of the Schelling Segregation Model.’’Demography 28:1-19.
526 Sociological Methods & Research

Conte, Rosaria, Bruce Edmonds, Scott Moss, and R. Keith Sawyer. 2001. ‘‘Sociology and
Social Theory in Agent Based Social Simulation: A Symposium.’’ Computational and
Mathematical Organization Theory 7:183-205.
Cummings, Jean L., Denise DiPasquale, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2001. Measuring the Conse-
quences of Promoting Inner City Homeownership . Medford, MA: Fletcher School, Tufts
University. http://papers.ssrn.com/s013/papers.cfm?abstract_id = 310220
Dorling, Danny, George Smith, Michael Noble, Gemma Wright, Roger Burrows, Jonathan M.
Bradshaw, Heather Joshi, Charles Pattie, Richard Mitchell, Anne E. Green, and Andrew
McCulloch. 2001. ‘‘How Much Does Place Matter?’’ Environment and Planning A
33:1335-69.
Duncan, Otis D. and Beverly Duncan. 1955. ‘‘A Methodological Analysis of Segregation
Indexes.’’American Sociological Review 20:210-17.
Epstein, Joshua M. and Robert Axtell. 1996. Growing Artiﬁcial Societies: Social Science
From the Bottom Up . Washington, DC: Brookings Institution & MIT Press.
Flache, Andreas and Rainer Hegselmann. 2001. ‘‘Do Irregular Grids Make a Difference?
Relaxing the Spatial Regularity Assumption in Cellular Models of Social Dynamics.’’
Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 4 (4). http://www.soc.surrey.ac.uk/
JASSS/4/4/6.html
Fossett, Mark A. and Warren Waren. 2005. ‘‘Overlooked Implications of Ethnic Preferences
for Residential Segregation in Agent-Based Models.’’Urban Studies 42:1893-917.
Giddens, Anthony. 1985. ‘‘Time, Space and Regionalisation.’’ Pp. 265-95 inSocial Relations
and Spatial Structures (Critical Human Geography Series), edited by Derek Gregory and
John Urry. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
Glass, Ruth. 1964. ‘‘Introduction: Aspects of Change.’’ Pp. xiii-xlii in London: Aspects of
Change, edited by Centre for Urban Studies. London: MacGibbon & Kee.
Golledge, Reginald G. and Robert J. Stimson. 1997. Spatial Behavior, a Geographic Per-
spective. New York: Guilford.
Gottdiener, Mark. 1994. The Social Production of Urban Space . Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Grannis, Rick. 1998. ‘‘The Importance of Trivial Streets: Residential Streets and Residential
Segregation.’’American Journal of Sociology 103:1530-64.
Granovetter, Mark S. 1973. ‘‘The Strength of Weak Ties.’’ American Journal of Sociology
78:1360-80.
Ha¨ gerstrand, Torsten. 1970. ‘‘What About People in Regional Science?’’ Papers of the
Regional Science Association 24:7-21.
———. 1982. ‘‘Diorama, Path and Project.’ ’ Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geo-
graﬁe 73:323-39.
Harris, Chauncy D. and Edward L. Ullman. 1945. ‘‘The Nature of Cities.’’ Annals of the
American Academy of Political Science 242:7-17.
Harvey, David. 1982. The Limits to Capital . Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Haughton, Graham, Martin Jones, Jamie Peck, Adam Tickell, and Aidan While. 2000.
‘‘Labour Market Policy as Flexible Welfare: Prototype Employment Zones and the New
Workfarism.’’Regional Studies 34:669-80.
Hoyt, Homer. 1939. The Structure and Growth of Residential Neighborhoods in American
Cities. Washington, DC: Federal Housing Administration.
Ihlanfeldt, Keith and Benjamin Scaﬁdi. 2004. ‘‘Whites’ Neighbourhood Racial Preferences
and Neighbourhood Racial Composition in the United States: Evidence From the Multi-
City Study of Urban Inequality.’’Housing Studies 19:325-59.
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 527

Jacobs, Jane. 1961. The Death and Life of Great American Cities . New York: Random
House.
Jargowsky, Paul A. 1996. ‘‘Take the Money and Run: Economic Segregation in U.S. Metro-
politan Areas.’’American Sociological Review 61:984-98.
Kitchin, Robert M. 1996. ‘‘Increasing the Integrity of Cognitive Mapping Research: Apprais-
ing Conceptual Schemata of Environment Behaviour Interaction.’’ Progress in Human
Geography 20:56-84.
Lamont, Miche`le and Vira ´ g Molna´ r. 2002. ‘‘The Study of Boundaries in the Social
Sciences.’’Annual Review of Sociology 28:167-95.
Laurie, Alexander J. and Narendra K. Jaggi. 2003. ‘‘Role of ‘Vision’ in Neighborhood Racial
Segregation.’’Urban Studies 40:2687-704.
Lefebvre, Henri. 1991. The Production of Space . Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Lynch, Kevin. 1960. The Image of the City . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Macy, Michael W. and Robert Willer. 2002. ‘‘From Factors to Actors: Computational Sociol-
ogy and Agent-Based Modeling.’ ’Annual Review of Sociology 28:143-66.
Mann, Peter H. 1965. An Approach to Urban Sociology . London: Routledge.
Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton. 1988. ‘‘The Dimensions of Residential Segrega-
tion.’’Social Forces 67:281-315.
Massey, Douglas S. and Mitchell L. Eggers. 1990. ‘‘The Ecology of Inequality: Minorities and
the Concentration of Poverty, 1970-1980.’’American Journal of Sociology 95:1153-89.
McCulloch, Andrew. 2001. ‘‘Ward-Level Deprivation and Individual Social and Economic Out-
comes in the British Household Panel Survey.’’Environment and Planning A33:667-84.
Milgram, Stanley. 1967. ‘‘The Small World Problem.’’Psychology Today 2:60-67.
Morrill, Richard L. 1991. ‘‘On the Measure of Geographical Segregation.’’ Geography
Research Forum 11:25-36.
O’Sullivan, David. 2001. ‘‘Graph Cellular Automata: A Generalised Discrete Urban and
Regional Model.’’Environment and Planning B: Planning & Design 28:687-705.
———. 2002. ‘‘Toward Micro-Scale Modeling of Gentriﬁcation.’’ Journal of Geographical
Systems 4:251-74.
O’Sullivan, David and Mordechai Haklay. 2000. ‘‘Agent-Based Models and Individualism:
Is the World Agent-Based?’’Environment and Planning A 32:1409-25.
O’Sullivan, David, James R. Macgill, and Chaoqing Yu. 2003. ‘‘Agent-Based Residential
Segregation: A Hierarchically Structured Spatial Model.’ ’ Pp. 493-507 in Agent 2003:
Challenges in Social Simulation , edited by Charles M. Macal, Michael North, and David
Sallach. Chicago: University of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory.
Painter, Chris and Emma Clarence. 2001. ‘‘UK Local Action Zones and Changing Urban
Governance.’’Urban Studies 38:1215-32.
Portugali, Juval, Itzhak Benenson, and Itzhak Omer. 1994. ‘‘Sociospatial Residential
Dynamics: Stability and Instability Within a Self-Organizing City.’’ Geographical Analy-
sis 26:321-40.
———. 1997. ‘‘Spatial Cognitive Dissonance and Sociospatial Emergence in a Self-Organiz-
ing City.’’Environment and Planning B: Planning & Design 24:263-85.
Pujol, Josep M., Andreas Flache, Jordi Delgado, and Ramon Sangu ¨ esa. 2005. ‘‘How Can
Social Networks Ever Become Complex? Modelling the Emergence of Complex Net-
works From Local Social Exchanges.’’ Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simula-
tion 8 (4). http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/8/4/12.html
Quillian, Lincoln. 1999. ‘‘Migration Patterns and the Growth of High-Poverty Neighbor-
hoods, 1970-1990.’’American Journal of Sociology 105:1-37 .
528 Sociological Methods & Research

Reardon, Sean F. and Glenn Firebaugh. 2002. ‘‘Measures of Multi-Group Segregation.’’
Sociological Methodology 32:33-67.
Reardon, Sean F. and David O’Sullivan. 2004. ‘‘Measures of Spatial Segregation.’’ Sociolo-
gical Methodology 34:121-62.
Riley, Kathryn and Rob Watling. 1999. ‘‘Education Action Zones: An Initiative in the Mak-
ing.’’Public Money and Management 19:51-58.
Robins, Garry, Philippa Pattison, and Jodie Woolcock. 2005. ‘‘Small and Other Worlds: Glo-
bal Network Structures From Local Processes.’’ American Journal of Sociology 110:
894-936.
Sakoda, James M. 1971. ‘‘The Checkerboard Model of Social Interaction.’’Journal of Math-
ematical Sociology 1:119-32.
Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley. 2002. ‘‘Assessing
’Neighborhood Effects’: Social Processes and New Directions in Research.’’ Annual
Review of Sociology 28:443-78.
Sawyer, R. Keith. 2001. ‘‘Emergence in Sociology: Contemporary Philosophy of Mind and
Some Implications for Sociological Theory.’’American Journal of Sociology 107:551-85.
———. 2003. ‘‘Artiﬁcial Societies: Multiagent Systems and the Micro-Macro Link in Socio-
logical Theory.’’Sociological Methods & Research 31:325-63.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1969. ‘‘Models of Segregation.’’ American Economic Association
Papers and Proceedings 59:488-93.
———. 1971. ‘‘Dynamic Models of Segregation.’’ Journal of Mathematical Sociology
1:143-86.
———. 1978. Micromotives and Macrobehavior. New York: Norton.
Semboloni, Ferdinando. 2000. ‘‘The Growth of an Urban Cluster Into a Dynamic Self-Modifying
Spatial Pattern.’’Environment and Planning B: Planning & Design27:549-64.
Shi, Wenzhong and Matthew Yick Cheung Pang. 2000. ‘‘Development of Voronoi-Based
Cellular Automata: An Integrated Dynamic Model for Geographical Information Sys-
tems.’’International Journal of Geographical Information Science 14:455-74.
St. John, Craig and Robert Clymer. 2000. ‘‘Racial Residential Segregation by Level of Socio-
economic Status.’’Social Science Quarterly 81:701-15.
Suarez, Ray. 1999. The Old Neighborhood: What We Lost in the Great Suburban Migration:
1966-1999. New York: Free Press.
Takeyama, Masanao. 1997. ‘‘Building Spatial Models Within GIS Through Geo-Algebra.’’
Transactions in GIS 2:245-56.
Takeyama, Masanao and Helen Couclelis. 1997. ‘‘Map Dynamics: Integrating Cellular Auto-
mata and GIS Through Geo-Algebra.’’ International Journal of Geographical Informa-
tion Science 11:73-91.
Thrift, Nigel J. 1983. ‘‘On the Determination of Social Action in Space and Time.’’ Environ-
ment and Planning D: Society and Space 1:23-57.
Vigdor, Jacob L. 2003. ‘‘Residential Segregation and Preference Misalignment.’’ Journal of
Urban Economics 54:587-609.
Wassermann, Henry and Gary Yohe. 2001. ‘‘Segregation and the Provision of Spatially
Deﬁned Local Public Goods.’’American Economist 45:13-24.
Watts, Duncan J. and Steven H. Strogatz. 1998. ‘‘Collective Dynamics of ‘Small-World’ Net-
works.’’Nature 393:440-42.
White, Michael J. 1983. ‘‘The Measurement of Spatial Segregation.’’ American Journal of
Sociology 88:1008-18.
O’Sullivan / Agent-Based Models of Social Systems 529

White, M. 1987. American Neighborhoods and Residential Differentiation. New York: Rus-
sell Sage Foundation.
Wilensky, Uri. 1999. ‘‘NetLogo’’ [Computer software]. Evanston, IL: Center for Connected Lea-
rning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University. http://ccl.northwestern
.edu/netlogo
Wong, David W. S. 1993. ‘‘Spatial Indices of Segregation.’’Urban Studies 30:559-72.
———. 2002. ‘‘Modeling Local Segregation: A Spatial Interaction Approach.’’ Geographi-
cal and Environmental Modelling 6:81-97.
David O’Sullivan is an associate professor of geography at the University of Auckland, New
Zealand. His research interests are in geographical simulation modeling, spatial analysis, and
complexity. In recent work, he has focused on simulation and measurement of urban neigh-
borhood change, particularly residential segregation. He is the author, with David Unwin, of
Geographic Information Analysis (New York: John Wiley, 2003).
530 Sociological Methods & Research
