Proceedings of the 2009 Winter Simulation Conference
M. D. Rossetti, R. R. Hill, B. Johansson, A. Dunkin, and R. G. Ingalls, eds.
Duopoly Electricity Markets with A ccurate and Inaccurate Market Goals
Zhi Zhou
Wai Kin Victor Chan
Department of Decision Sciences & Engineering Systems
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, USA
Joe H. Chow
Department of Electrical, Computer & Systems Engineering
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, U.S.A.
Serhiy Kotsan
New Y ork Independent System Operator
Rensselaer, NY 12144
ABSTRACT
Electricity markets are complex systems due to their deregulation and restructuring. We develop an agent-based simulation
model for a stylized electricity pool market and simulate the market as a repeated game. An online hill climbing with
adjustment algorithm is applied to generat or agents to guide them to bid strategica lly to reach their expected market share. It
is observed that accurate (or genial) expected market goals lead to collusive behavior of generator agents with an equilibrium
where their total pro ﬁt is maximized. On the other hand, it is also found th at inaccurate (or malicious) market goals could
result in price war with an equilibrium where their pro ﬁts are minimized.
1 INTRODUCTION
An electricity market is a complex system because of the natur e of the traded goods (electricity) and the complexity of the
market structure and composition. It is not economic to store electricity, and hence, supply and demand must be balanced
in real time subject to transmission and cap acity constraints. Moreover, an electri city market itself is a combination of
many submarkets, such as the day-ahead market, real-time marke t, bilateral market, installed capacity market, and emission
market. In addition, an electricity market might also connect to other markets, such as the natural gas and petroleum market.
Due to high capital investments, participants (companies) in an e lectricity market are relatively concentrated, resulting in the
following consequences: (1) some companies may be organized vertically and participate in more than one of the submarkets
simultaneously, and (2) some of the companies may be big enough to apply their market power to manipulate market prices.
Auction is a widely used mechanism to create competitive markets in homogeneous commodity exchanges such as
agricultural products, mineral resources, and ﬁnancial market exchange such as stocks, bonds, and treasury bills. Auction
can produce ef ﬁcient allocations and prices even with a rather small number of players who have incomplete or imperfect
information on supply and demand ( Friedman and Rust 1993 ). In electricity markets, auction is one of the most important
mechanisms to allocate electricity, installed capacity, and transmission rights. Bidders in these markets are asymmetric and
do not know the information of their opponents. However, they participate regularly to bid on the same commodity with
varying quantities. Bidders with generation capacity or cost advantages may try to exercise their market power to maximize
their pro ﬁts. As a result, auctions in electricity markets are a repeated and asymmetric game with imperfect competition.
Most existing research focuses on theore tical modeling and analysis with assumptions such as symmetric bidders, single
commodity, or competitive bidding ( Bower and Bunn 2001 ).
This paper employs an agent-based simulation (ABS) and optimization approach to analyze bidding behavior in electricity
markets. We create an agent-based simulation model that mimics the evolutionary dynamics of bidding behavior in a repeated
and multi-unit auction under the settings of an electricity market. The market particip ants are modeled as intelligent agents
with non-homogenous optimization objectiv es and learning abilities. Ou r goal is to understand how market participants
behave in this repeated game and what the consequences are.
1569
978-1-4244-5771-7/09/$26.00 ©2009 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the background and related work of electricity markets
and agent-based simulations. Section 3 presents an agent-based simulation model and states the assumptions and settings of
the experiments. Section 4 discusses the experimental results and Section 5 offers some conclusions.
2 BACKGROUND
During the last twenty years, a process has been undergone worldw ide to restructure electrical power facilities and liberalize
the markets for the services based on these facilities. This pro cess moves the electricity industry from vertically integrated
monopolies to more ef ﬁcient, separated companies, and replaces the re gulated, cost-based market to a supply and demand
based competitive one. The major goal of this reform is to promo te energy conservation and alternative energy technologies,
and to reduce oil and gas consumption through technology improvement and regulations ( FERC 2006 ).
Typically, two types of instruments for trading electricity are used: pool and bilateral contracts. In a pool contract market,
generation and customer companies submit their bids and the m arket is cleared by a market operator (e.g., the Independent
System Operator (ISO)). The operator also announces the clearing prices for the next day based on the amount of the supply
and demand bids submitted by the producers and buyers. Becau se of its main usage in day-ahead and real time bidding,
the pool market is considered as a short-term trading market. On the other hand, in a bilateral contract market, bilateral
contracts are used by companies to hedge against the risk of daily price volatility. Bilateral markets are forward markets.
The contract periods can cover six months or more.
The complexity of electricity markets has attracted attentions from many research groups since 1990. Most of the
research focuses on market ef ﬁciency and generation competition. The research problems can be studied by analyzing market
equilibria under different market scenarios or structures. E quilibrium theory and game theory are therefore good candidate
tools for studying these types of problems.
Green and Newbery (1992) introduce a supply-function equilibrium model ( Klemperer and Meyer 1989 ) and formulate
the England and Wales electricity market as a single- shot game consisting of two symmetrical players. By ﬁnding the Nash
equilibrium for the supply schedule, the a uthors show that a high premium on margi nal costs is possible despite having a
competitive market. Similarly, Rudkevich et al. (1998) estimate the price of an electricity pool market by using a closed-form
mathematical formula based on the suppl y function equilibrium (SFE). Models ba sed on the equilibrium theory usually
assume either perfect and complete information about opponents or no strategic bidding behavior.
Another line of studies is based on game theory. von der Fehr and Harbord (1993) model the England and Wales
electricity market as a ﬁrst-price, sealed-bid, multi-unit, and private-valued auction market. Their results show that the
bidding behavior tend to support the theore tical model. The authors claim that pure-st rategy equilibria do not exist for a wide
range of demand distributions. Borenstein and Bushnell (1999) consider the California electricity market after deregulation
as a static Cournot market and simulate the market using historical cost data. They show that potential market power during
high demand hours is possible. Game theory is a good altern ative to analytically study of the market when the number
of participants is small. However, with the deregulation of electricity markets, electric power systems have become more
complex and involved a large number of competing participants.
Agent-based simulation (ABS) is a relatively new technique that may overcome the shortcomings of traditional method-
ologies. The participants are modeled as agents. Unlike tra ditional methodologies, ABS does not require the knowledge of
perfect or complete information of participant agents. Agents are equipped with learning algorithms that could guide them
to achieve their goals. ABS is a powerful t ool for simulating dynamics of multi-partic ipant systems and analyzing emerging
behavior.
Bunn and Oliveira (2001) model the England and Wales electricity market under the New Electricity Trading Arrangements
(NET A) using ABS. They show that electricity prices are high when the demand is in the highest range. They also observe
that power plants with ﬂexible technologies are relatively more valuable under the NET A. Nicolaisen et al. (2001) use ABS
to examine market power and ef ﬁciency as functions of market concentration and capacity. The market is modeled as
a double-auction market, which is cleared by a discriminatory midpoint pricing mechanism. Wu and Guo (2004) apply
a reinforcement learning method-the learning automata-to the Western Systems Coordinating Council (WSCC) 9-bus test
system. Micola et al. (2008) study whether a vertically integrated ﬁrm can increase its pro ﬁts in oligopolistic energy markets
by using interdependent rewards obtained from strategic business units. Tellidou and Bakirtzis (2007) examine the effect of
participants’ behavior such as capacity withholding and tacit collusion to market performance. They model the electricity
market as an hourly repeated game on a two-node power system, which is cleared by using uniform pricing settlements.
Nanduri and Das (2007) assess the market power of generation companies under auction-based pricing for a day-ahead
energy market.
1570
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
Although potential collusive behavior has been reported in wholesale electricity pool markets in, for example, Spain
(Fabra and Toro 2005 ), California ( Puller 2007 ), and England and Wales ( Bunn and Martoccia 2005 ), related studies fo-
cusing on collusive behavior of generators in repeated games are limited. Two of such studies are by Cau (2003) and
Cau and Anderson (2003) .I n Cau (2003) , two identical generators supply electricity at the same node, hence no network
congestion is modeled. The author applies a co-evolutionary genetic algorithm to the generator agents to allow them to bid
strategy over time. It is shown that collusive behavior resulting from learning may occur in a stylized electricity market even
the system does not converge to a stable equilibrium outcome. This model assumes that the number of players and their
strategy spaces are public information. With similar market settings, Cau and Anderson (2003) study the tacit collusion of
generators in oligopolistic electricity markets in which generators’ bidding structure is piecewise linear.
In this paper, we set up an ABS simulation model for a ﬁve-node electric power system with customized transmission
congestion constraints and real time elastic demand. We apply an online-hill climbing learning algorithm to generator agents
who have market power to bid strategically but with limited information about the market, including information of the
opponents. The generator agents, however, can set their goals of market share and bid strategically to reach their goals.
The objectives of this study are to examine what bidding behavior (collusive or co mpetitive) will result under these market
settings with accurate or inaccurate market goals and under the online-hill climbing learning algorithm.
3 AN ABS MODEL OF AN ELECTRICITY MARKET
In this section, we present an agent-based simulation model for a ﬁve-node electricity market including generation companies,
load serving entities (LSEs), transmission companies, and ISO.
3.1 Objective
During the course of a repeated bidding game, what a generation company knows are its own historical bids, winning
quantities, and clearing prices (if the market is cleared by the discriminatory pricing mechanism, generation companies only
know their own winning prices). The generation company do not know their opponents bidding strategies and winning
quantities. Nevertheless, this limited information is critical for the generation companies to make decisions on the next bid.
Therefore, to make rational decisions, generation companies must have the ability to learn to estimate the bidding strategies
of their opponents. The objective of our study is to understand the bidding behavior of generation companies under the
assumption that the generation companies can accurately estimate their market share.
3.2 Physical Model
To make the simulation close to real world model and reveal nontrivial result, we set up a stylized electricity market with
comprehensive characteristics of both physical transmission network and market con ﬁguration.
3.2.1 Transmission network
The ABS model considered in this paper is based on a ﬁve-zone transmission network. The topology of the power system
is illustrated in Figure 1. Each zone consists of one LSE and up to ten generators. These zones are inter-connected through
six transmission lines with capacity limit. While the simulation model is designed to allow active power ﬂow constraints on
any of the lines, in this paper we only consider the constraint that the total amount of active power transmitted from Zones
3a n d2t oZ o n e4i sr e s t r i c t e dt oT4, an adjustable parameter.
3.2.2 Participants
In the restructuring process, a power system is separated into generation, transmission, distribution, and system operator,
which are the major participants in an electricity market. In our simulation model, they are called generation companies,
transmission companies, LSEs, and ISO, respectively. The LSE s are the customers in a wholesale market. They contract with
other market participants to purchase electricity to satisfy the demand in their corresponding service areas. The generation
companies are the suppliers in the electricity market. They com pete with each other to sell their electricity through an auction
market or bilateral contracts. The transmission companies are organizations that own, maintain, and operate transmission
assets for pro ﬁt subject to regulation. The ISO is an organization that c oordinates, controls, and monitors the operations of
the electric power system. Some ISOs also act as the regulators i n their electricity markets, in cluding the wholesale markets.
1571
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
Figure 1: A Five-Zone Power System
3.2.3 Auction Procedure
In the day-ahead auction marke t of our simulation model at day t, the LSEs estimate the load demand in their service areas
for each hour of the next day (day t + 1) and submit that information to the ISO as load bid. The generation companies decide
their bids by using their knowledge about the env ironment and competitors. Before the end of day t, the ISO closes the
market for day t + 1 and clears the market. By selecting the cheapest electricity with a set of constraints including physical
limits, the ISO calculates the market clearing price using a uniform pricing mechanism. Meanwhile, the ISO decides the
generation and distribution scheduling information and return them to the generation companies and LSE. On day t + 1, the
generation companies schedule their operations and generate the amount of el ectricity they were committed to on day t.T h e
LSEs receive the amount of electricity based on their bids and distribute it to their end customers.
3.3 Agents
Our model implements the three types of agents correspond to the thr ee basic participants in the electricity market: generation
company agents, LSE agents, and ISO agent.
3.3.1 Generator agents
Each generation company, without loss of ge nerator, is assumed to own only one genera tor, represented as a generator agent.
Generator agents are differentiated by their maximum generation capacities and real cost functions.
1. Generator capacity, cost function
Generation capacity here means the maximum output of a generator. A cost function describes the relationship
between the output quantity and production cost. Basically, it includes the ﬁxed cost, variable cost, and cost for
starting up and shutting down the machines if they are used. For simplicity, only the variable cost is considered in
the following. The cost function used in this model is a polynomial cost function, which is de ﬁned in the following
equation
Cj(q j)= c j0q2
j + b j0q j + a j0, q j ∈ [0, MO j], (1)
where MO j is the maximum capacity, q j is the amount of electricity supplied by generator G j, Cj(q j) is the cost
for G j to supply q j units of electricity, and c j0, b j0,a n d a j0 are the coef ﬁcients of the cost function.
2. Bidding strategies
When a generator agent submits its bid to the ISO, it is required to report its supply function. If the agent reports
its real cost function as supply function, it is called a marginal cost bidder (MCB). Another situation is that it can
report an adjusted cost function as its supply function. In this case, the agent tries to be pro ﬁt. There are two ways
to adjust a bid: capacity withholding and price adjustment. Figure 2 gives an example for price adjustment. In the
ﬁgure, the agent can report a cost function (dotted line) higher than its real cost function (solid line). If the agent
has market power, its objective could be maximizing its pro ﬁt from this adjustment.
Because the price is decided by the supply function, price a djustment is implemented by raising or lowering the
coefﬁcients of the supply function. The adjustment is represented by the markup rate compared to the coef ﬁcients
1572
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
Figure 2: Supplier bids above its marginal cost function
of the marginal cost function. For example, if a genera tion company bids at a price 150% higher than its marginal
cost, its markup rate is 2 .5. If it bids at its marginal cost, its markup rate is 1.
Because bidding in an electricity pool ma rket is a repeated game, generators can learn from their bidding history
and market environment to improve their pro ﬁt. In our model, the agents can learn by using an online hill climbing
algorithm with adjustment (OHCA), which is introduced in Section 3.4.
3.3.2 LSE
There is one LSE agent in each zone. In our simulation model, its only task is to forecast the load demand for the next day
and report it to the ISO agent. The demand reported by the LSE agents can be elastic both time and price (see in Section 3.4
for details). The LSE agents do not take strategic actions. Their costs, however, are minimized with the help of the ISO by
selecting the cheapest generators. It should be noted that the parameters of the demand responsive curve are constant during
the simulation.
3.3.3 ISO
The objective of the ISO is to regulate the market by maximizing the social welfare or minimizing the total cost to meet the
load demand. The ISO agent selects the lowest cost generators with a higher priority. The constraints that prevent the ISO
agent from selecting all lowest cost generators include the g enerators’ capacity, transmission capacity, and power system
reliability.
The ISO agent collects bids from the generator and LSE agents before the market is closed. Then, it clears the market
by solving an optimal power ﬂow problem. After the market is cleared, the ISO agent informs the generator and LSE agents
their scheduling information. If the market is cleared with a uniform price, then this price is open to the public. Otherwise,
it is private, i.e., only sent to the related agents.
3.4 Experiment Settings
The following are the settings and assumptions on the market structure and physical transmission system of our model.
1. Generation capacity an d demand distribution
There is one generator agent in each zone except in Zone 4 (see Figure 1). In Zone 4, there are six generators,
denoted by G j( j = 1,..., 6). Compared to the generators in Zone 4, other generators have cheaper production
costs and can supply the demand in Zone 4 after satisfying their own demand. However, the amount of electricity
exported to Zone 4 is limited by the transmission line capacity, which is denoted by T4. Among the six generators
in Zone 4, two of them (i.e., G1 and G2) are identical companies with generation capacity larger than the sum of
the other four small generators, who are also identical. These four smaller gen erators are price-takers; they do not
bid strategically. The two large generators can use different pricing strategies to be more pro ﬁt. To facilitate our
study, the total amount of generation supply in the market is assumed to be greater than the total demand even
under transmission congestion.
1573
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
Figure 3: The Characteristics of the Demand
The demand has the two char acteristics: First, it varies during a 24-hour period as illustrated in the left part of
Figure 3 with peak hours and off-peak hours in the middle of the day and early morning, respectively. Figure 3
shows the demand curve for one day. Second, the demand i s a price-responsive curve (the right part of Figure 3)
for each hour of next day to the ISO.
The submitted load demand is divided into two parts: inelastic demand ( DI ) and elastic demand ( DS). The elastic
part drops when the price increases and reaches zero if the pr ice is too high. This elasticity is negatively proportional
to the price, as shown in the right part of Figure 3. In this part, the y-axis is the demand during the peak time. The
x-axis is the price. When the price is less than P1 (the lowest price at which the elastic part of the load demands
begins to drop), there is no decrease in the elastic load demand. When the price is greater than P1 but less than P2,
the elastic part begins to decrease proportional to the price. When the price is greater than P2 (the lowest price at
which the elastic load demand drops to zero), the demand remains at DI because only the inelastic load demand is
left.
2. Market settings
The market is cleared by the ISO using locational-based marginal price (LBMP), which means that the price is
uniform within each zone and different among zones due to the transmission congestion.
3. Market share
In this experiment, generator agents are assumed to be able t o estimate their market share. Because the two generators
are identical, they could share equally the market. They take this information into consideration when they bid.
4. Learning algorithm for generation company agents
The online hill climbing with adjustment (OHCA) algorithm is similar to those used in optimal search procedures.
The intuition of the OHCA algorithm is that an agent increases its bidding price if it becomes more pro ﬁtable and
decreases otherwise. In this paper, we set the amount of adjustment based on the agent’s targeted market share.
The detailed description of the OHCA used by generation company agents is provided in the following subsection:
(a) Notation
The notation used in this section are listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Notation for OHCA algorithm
Symbol
 Meaning
tij
 Adjustment rate decided by the difference between targeted market share and current market share
b j0
 First order coef ﬁcient of the marginal cost function for the jth generator
c j0
 Second order coef ﬁcient of the marginal cost function for the jth generator
ctij
 Coefﬁcient of the cost function in round t for the ith hour reported to the ISO by the jth generator
dtij
 Adjustment rate decided by the change of market share
G j
 The jth generator agent
Ptij
 Proﬁt in round t for the ith hour for the jth generator
rt+1,i, j
 Change rate on the coef ﬁcients of cost function in round t + 1f o rt h e ith hour for the jth generator
S j0
 Targeted market share for the jth generator
stij
 Market share in round t for the ith hour for the jth generator
0
 A constant multiplier to adjust the step size of markup rate
1574
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
(b) Action and Adjustment
We are mainly interested in the biddi ng behavior of the two large gener ators at Zone 4 because all the other
generators are marginal bidders and do not employ bidding strategies. As introduced earlier, these two generators
bid strategically by updating their bids. They change the bids by adjusting the mark-up rate of the ﬁrst two
coefﬁcients of the cost functions. In particular, the ﬁrst and second coef ﬁcients (i.e., ct+1,i, j and bt+1,i, j)o ft h e
reported cost function of Generator j (i.e., G j)a tt h e (t + 1)th round are adjusted by the following equations:
ct+1,i, j = ctij + c j0rt+1,i, j/0, (2)
and
bt+1,i, j = btij + b j0rt+1,i, j/0, (3)
where rt+1,i, j is the bidding markup rate, which controls the amount of adjustment on both coef ﬁcients of the
reported cost function in a bid. The constant multiplier, 0, is used here to manage the magnitude of the step
size. Its value might affect the convergence time or stability of the equilibrium. In all the experiments in the
following, a value of 8 is used and a reasonable convergence time and stability is obtained. In this paper, we
consider three factors that could in ﬂuence this adjustment: (a) the change in the pro ﬁt, (b) the change in the
market share, and (c) the distance to the targeted market share. The ﬁrst two factors together result in four
possible cases: (1) pro ﬁt increases and market share increases, (2) pro ﬁt increases but market share decreases,
(3) pro ﬁt decreases but market share increases, and (4) pro ﬁt decreases and market share decreases. Gaining
more pro ﬁt is a high priority; therefore, the amount of adjustment should be positive in both Cases (1) and (2)
(i.e., increase the bid to gain more pro ﬁt) and negative in both Cases (3) and (4) (i.e., decrease the bid to retain
the pro ﬁt). The magnitude of the adjustment in these four cases is determined by the amount of changes in the
market share in the unit of the targeted market share. In summary, the ﬁrst two factors (i.e., Cases (1) - (4))
contribute to the adjustment of markup rate in the format of the following equations:
dt+1,i, j =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
st−1,i, j −stij
S j0
if P tij ≥ Pt−1,i, j and s t−1,i, j > stij ;
1 if P tij ≥ Pt−1,i, j and s t−1,i, j ≤ stij ;
−1 − st−1,i, j −stij
S j0
if P tij < Pt−1,i, j and s t−1,i, j > stij ;
−1 if P tij < Pt−1,i, j and s t−1,i, j ≤ stij ;
(4)
The last factor contributing to the adjustment is the dista nce between the current market share and the targeted
market share. Speci ﬁcally, if the current market share is less than the targeted market share, G j takes a
conservative action by multiplying the adjustment with a factor equal to the difference between the targeted
market share and the current market share in the unit of the targeted market share. If G j gets more market
share than it expects, it has no incentive to make adjustment and therefore, this factor is one.
t+1,i, j =
{ S j0 −stij
S j0
if s tij < S j0
1 otherwise
(5)
Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 together determine the exact amount of adjustment in the markup rate, rt+1,i, j , based on the
following equation:
rt+1,i, j = dt+1,i, jbt+1,i, j (6)
(c) T ermination criteria
The simulation is terminated when e ither the maximum number of iterati ons (simulation days) is reached or
t h e r ei sn om o r ep r oﬁt gain in all the generator agents. The sec ond stopping condition means that an equilibrium
is obtained given the set of strategies used by the generator agents.
1575
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
Figure 4: G1 and G2 Bidding Rates VS Time
Figure 5: G1 and G2 Pro ﬁts VS Time
4 SIMULATION RESUL TS
Before discussing the simulation results, it should be pointed out that the other four smaller generators and the generators
outside Zone 4 are cheaper generators than G1 and G2. As a result, G1 and G2 are only competing for the total demand less
those satis ﬁed by all the other generators, which will always be picked by the ISO.
We study two types of market scenarios: accurate market goals and inaccurate market goals. In the accurate case,
because the two generators are identi cal, their expected market shares are each set to 50%. In the inaccurate case, both
generators overestimate their market power and set each of th eir market shares to 60%. In all the simulations below, the
maximum number of iterations is set to 2500 (days or rounds). All simulations are run on a 2 .5GHZ dual-core PC with 3
GB of RAM.
4.1 Accurate T argeted Market Share
Figures 4, 5, and the left part of Figure 6 show the dynamics of the supply bids, pro ﬁts, and clearing prices, respectively,
under the scenario of accurate market goals. The initial markup ra tes on the marginal cost of the two generators are 1 and
3, respectively. This means that G1 bids at its marginal cost while G2 bids 2 times higher than its marginal cost.
1576
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
Figure 6: Market Clearing Price VS Time with Different Initial Markup Rates
Figure 7: Surface Plots of the G1 and G2 Pro ﬁts
Figure 5 shows three important points, which are encircled. The ﬁrst one is the initial point where the pro ﬁto f G1 is
greater than that of G2 because G2’s supply is lower. Correspondingly, G1’s market share is higher than that of G2.A st h e
two generators start to learn and adjust their strategies, their pro ﬁts evolve to equality (because they are identical). This
ﬁrst occurs at the second encircled point in Figure 5. After the equality point (i.e., equal market share) is reached, the two
generators behave like a coalition but they in fact bid individually, independently, and identically to maximize their pro ﬁts
individually because they do not communi cate with each other. The maximum point happens at the maximum price just
before the demand starts to drop (at the third circle in Figure 5).
Two transition periods are worthy of discussion here: The ﬁrst one is the period during which the two generators learn
to reach equality (from point 1 to point 2) and the second one is the period during which the two generators learn to reach
maximum (from point 2 to point 3). We ﬁrst enumerate G1’s proﬁt based on its bidding price and G2’s bidding price (see the
left part of Figure 7). One can see from the left part of Figure 7 that for a ﬁxed bidding price of G1, G1’s proﬁt increases
in G2’s bidding price. On the contrary, for a ﬁxed bidding price of G2, G1’s proﬁt decreases in its bidding price.
The right part of Figure 7 shows the sum of the pro ﬁts of the two generators with respect to their supply bids. The
arrow in the center of the ﬁgure illustrates the collection of points where the two generators equally share the market.
Because the demand is responsive to the market clear ing price as illustrated in the right part of Figure 3, there is a point
where the LSE payment is maximized. Moreover, b ecause the payment of the LSEs is related to the pro ﬁt of generators,
there should be a point where the total pro ﬁt of all generators is maximized. This can be considered as a multi-player Nash
equilibrium. If the generators in the market have the inte nsion to collude implicitly or explicitly even though they do not
communicate with each other, they might tr y to explore this maximum point and sta y there given that they are identical
1577
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
and understand that they cannot beat each other by deviating fro m the collusion. Moreover, because the two generators are
identical, they share the market equally in steady state. Otherwise, the market is not in steady state and one of generators
can change its bidding strategy to gain more market share and pro ﬁt.
Therefore, regardless of what thei r initial supply bids are, they learn to ﬁnd the point where they share the market equally
(the ﬁrst transition period), which occurs at some point on the line indicated by the arrow in the right part of Figure 7.
Because there is a maximum on that line, the two genera tors will bid strategically to reach that maximum.
We test different combinations of initial bidding prices as shown in Table 2. Because G1 and G2 are identical, we only
use the bidding rate of G1 of 1 and 2 (the 1 st column) and the bidding rate of G2 from 1 to 9 with unity increment (the 1 st
row). Each entry in Table 2 gives the clearing price under the corresponding combination of the bidding rates of G1 and
G2. All experiments result in a similar clearing price (equilibrium). Only the transition periods are different. Therefore, the
experimental results show that the OHCA learning algorithm under the market settings in this paper can lead to a collusive
behavior of the two generators and that the two generators can always reach the market equilibrium at which their total
proﬁt is maximized regardless of what the initial bidding rates are.
Table 2: Market Clearing Price unde r Different Initial Bidding Price
Bidding Rate of G2
Bidding Rate of G1
123456789
1
 429.66 435 .85 438 .24 438 .54 440 .16 439 .91 436 .72 436 .59 439 .28
2
 435.85 435 .93 436 .5 440 .24 439 .28 436 .96 437 .36 440 .02 439 .94
The initial bidding rates, however, do affect the time to reach the equilibrium. The right part of Figure 6 shows the
dynamics of the changes in the clearing price when the initial markup rates are 2 and 8 for G1 and G2, respectively. The
time for the two generators to reach the equality point is much longer than the case we showed in the left part of Figure 6
because the difference between the initial bidding rates of G1 and G2 in this case is larger than that in the former case,
which makes these two generators spent more time to learn to evolve to equality.
4.2 Biased T argeted Market Share
Equally sharing a market is an ideal result. In practice, however, generators are usually competing for the market share based
on their estimated market power. The problem is that they might not have an accurate estimate of their market power. As a
result, they might set a wrong targeted market share. The consequence could be a price war, which is the case observed in
the experiments below.
This section tries to answer the question ”what would ha ppen if both generators expect more than 50% of the market
share?” In particular, we experiment with the scenario where both G1 and G2 expect 60% of the market share with everything
else being equal. The initial bidding rates for G1 and G2 are 1 and 3, respectively.
Figure 8 illustrates the dynamics of the bidding rates and pro ﬁts of the two generators. It can be seen that the bidding
rates of both generators converge to the marginal rate (the left part of Figure 8)a n dt h ep r oﬁts reduce to the one obtained
at the marginal cost for both generators (the right part of Figure 8). This result implies that under the OHCA algorithm,
if both generators erroneously or maliciously set a targeted market share larger than what their market power can achieve,
they will end up in a price war.
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present an agent-based simulation model on a stylized electricity pool market. We apply the online hill
climbing with adjustment (OHCA) algorithm to generator agents to guide them to maximize their pro ﬁts. When the agents
accurately (or genially) set their targeted market shares equal t o their market power, collusive bidding behavior is observed
and equilibrium is obtained when the total pro ﬁts of the agents are maximized. However, when the agents erroneously (or
maliciously) set their targeted market shares greater than th eir market power, the consequence will be a price war and their
proﬁts will be minimized (rather than maximized) to be equal to the marginal-cost pro ﬁt.
The main contributions of this paper are the following.
1578
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
Figure 8: The Dynamics of the Bidding Rates and Pro ﬁts with Biased Targeted Market Share
1. This paper presents an agent-based simulation model with several characteristics, including active power ﬂows limits
and real-time elastic demand.
2. It is shown that under the OHCA algorithm, collusive behavior (resulting from non- communicated cooperation
through learning) can maximize pro ﬁts while competing behavior (resulting from inaccurate market goals) will
minimize pro ﬁts.
3. The experimental results show that with an accurate targeted market share, the agents’ pro ﬁts increase simultaneously
after they reach the equality point and that the ﬁrst maximum point after equality is always the global pro ﬁtm a x i m u m
point. This ﬁnding not only gives insights about the effect of bidding behavior of two identical generators when
they try to reach their targeted market share, but also provides an indication of how two independent (with no
communication) generators maximize their total pro ﬁt using a relatively simple OHCA algorithm.
4. The experimental results also imply that with an in accurate targeted market share, the agents’ proﬁts will be equal to the
marginal-cost proﬁt, that is, a price war. This result is consistent with the Bertrand games (Kreps and Scheinkman 1983 ).
Real-world generators are much more complex. Therefore , future work includes testing asymmetric generators and
simulating different learning algorithms w ith inaccurate estimation of the market share.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the NYISO for supporting the research reported here.
REFERENCES
Borenstein, S., and J. Bushnell. 1999. An empirical analysis of the potential for market power in california’s electricity
industry. The Journal of Industrial Economics 47.
Bower, J., and D. Bunn. 2001. Experimental analysis of the ef ﬁciency of uniform-price versus discriminatory auctions in
the england and wales electricity market. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25:561–592.
Bunn, D., and M. Martoccia. 2005. Unilateral and collusive market power in the electricity pool of england and wales.
Energy Economics 27:305–315.
Bunn, D., and F. Oliveira. 2001. Agent-based simulation-an app lication to the new electricity trading arrangements of england
and wales. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 5.
Cau, T. 2003. Analyzing tacit collusion in oligopolistic electricity markets using a co-evolutionary approach . Ph.D. thesis,
Australian Graduate School of Management, University of New South Wales and University of Sydney.
Cau, T., and E. Anderson. 2003. A co-evolutionary approach to the tacit collusion of generators in oligopolistic electricity
markets: piecewise linear bidding structure case. The 2003 Congress on Evolutionary computation 4:2306–2313.
Fabra, N., and J. Toro. 2005. Price wars and collusion in the spanish electricity market. International Journal of Industrial
Organization 23:155–181.
1579
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhou, Chan, Chow and Kotsan
FERC 2006. United states of america electricity energy market competition task force and the federal energy regulatory
commission, government report . FERC.
Friedman, D., and J. Rust. 1993. The double auction market: Institutions, theories, and evidence . Westview Press.
Green, R., and D. Newbery. 1992. Competition in the british electricity spot market. Journal of Po litical Economy 100.
Klemperer, P ., and M. Meyer. 1989. Supply functio n equilibria in oligopoly under uncertainty. Econometria 57:1243–1277.
Kreps, D., and J. Scheinkman. 1983. Quantity precommitment and bertrand competition yield cournot outcomes. The Bell
Journal of Economics 14:326–337.
Micola, A., A. Banal-Estanol, and D. Bunn. 2008. Incentives and coordination in vertically related energy markets. Journal
of Economic Behavior & Organization 67:381–393.
Nanduri, V ., and T. Das. 2007. A reinforcement learning model to assess market power under auction-based energy pricing.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22:85–95.
Nicolaisen, J., V . Petrov, and L. Tesfatsion. 2001. Market power and ef ﬁciency in a computational electricity market with
discriminatory double-auction pricing. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 5.
Puller, S. 2007. Pricing and ﬁrm conduct in california’s deregulated electricity market. The Review of Economics and
Statistics 89:75–87.
Rudkevich, A., M. Duckworth, and R. Rosen. 1998. Modeling el ectricity pricing in a deregulated generation industry: The
potential for oligopoly pricing in a poolco. Energy Journal 19:19–48.
Tellidou, A., and A. Bakirtzis. 2007. Agent-based analysis of capacity withholding and tacit collusion in electricity markets.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22.
von der Fehr, N., and D. Harbord. 1993. Spot mark et competition in the uk electricity industry. The Economic Journal 103:531–
546.
Wu, Q., and J. Guo. 2004. Optimal bidding strategies in electricity markets using reinforcement learning. Electric Power
Components and Systems 32:175–192.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
ZHI ZHOU is a PhD student in the department of Decision Science and Engineering System at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. He received his bachelor’s degree and master’s deg ree in computer science from Wuhan University, China, in 2001
and 2004, respectively. His research interests are simulation, mu lti-agent systems, and electricity markets. His email address
is <zhouz@rpi.edu>.
W AI KIN VICTOR CHAN is an Assistant Professor of the Department of Decision Sciences and Engineering Systems
at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. He received his bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree in electrical engineering
from, respectively, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China in 1997, and Tsinghua University, China in 2000, and M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in industrial engineering and operations research from University of California, Berkeley in 2001 and 2005,
respectively. His research interests include discrete-event simulation, agent-based simulation, mathematical programming,
and their applications in energy markets, social networks, ser vice systems, transportation net works, and manufacturing. His
e-mail address is <chanw@rpi.edu>.
JOE H. CHOW is a Professor of Electrical, Computer, and System s Engineering and Associate Dean of Engineering
for Research and Graduate Programs at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New Y ork. He received his BS degrees in
Electrical Engineering and Mathematics from the University of Minnesota, and the MS and PhD degrees from the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. He worked at General Elect ric Company before joining RPI in 1987. His current research
includes V oltage-Sourced Converter based Flexible AC Transmission Systems, and the analysis, modeling, and control of
large power systems using synchronized phasor measurements. He has received several awards in control and power systems,
and is a fellow of IEEE.
SERHIY KOTSAN is an Economist of the Market Monitoring Unit at the New Y ork Independent System Operator. He
received his bachelor’s degree in Fina ncial Management from Hogeschool van Utrecht in 1998, and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees
in economics from West Virginia University in 2003 and 2005, respectively. His research interests include game theory,
industrial organization and their application in electricity markets. His e-mail address is <skotsan@nyiso.com>.
1580
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:01:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
