Empirical agent-based land market: Integrating adaptive economic
behavior in urban land-use models
Tatiana Filatova ⁎
Centre for Studies in Technology and Sustainable Development, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
Deltares, Postbus 85467, 3508 AL Utrecht, The Netherlands
abstractarticle info
Available online 25 July 2014 This paper introduces an economic agent-based model of an urban housing market. The RHEA (Risks and He-
donics in Empirical Agent-based land market) model captures natural hazard risks and environmental amenities
through hedonic analysis, facilitating empirical agent-based land market modeling. RHEA is well grounded in
economic theory and uses rich spatial data and econometric analysis. It moves beyond the existing work by ex-
plicitly simulating the emergence of property prices and their spatial distribution under adaptive price expecta-
tions of heterogeneous agents, advancing toward empirical modeling of agent-based land markets. At the same
time RHEA operates in a realistic GIS landscape where realtor and households agents form ask and bid prices
using empirical hedonic price functions. The simulation results demonstrate that this combination of theoretical-
ly sound micro-foundations in agents’ behavior and empirical data is feasible. This opens opportunities to explore
various methodological and policy-relevant research questions including exploration of abrupt non-marginal
changes in markets and regime shifts in coupled socio-environmental systems.
© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords:
Housing market
Hedonic model
Price expectations
Agent-based
Flood risk
Amenities
1. Introduction
Spatial patterns of land values in real estate markets emerge from
complex interactions of market dynamics, heterogeneous trader prefer-
ences, and heterogeneous attributes of the property stock. Various
modeling approaches aim to represent the feedbacks between micro-
foundations of actors’ behavior and macro dynamics of property mar-
kets measured in land prices and their spatial patterns. There is a long
tradition of modeling these spatial processes from the bottom up
using statistics ( Geoghegan, Wainger, & Bockstael, 1997; Irwin &
Bockstael, 2002; Plantinga & Lewis, 2014; Sheppard, 1999), cellular au-
tomata (van Delden, Luja, & Engelen, 2007; Verburg, de Koning, Kok,
Veldkamp, & Bouma, 1999 ), micro-simulation ( Ettema, Arentze, &
Timmermans, 2011; Miller, Hunt, Abraham, & Salvini, 2004 ) or agent-
based methods ( Brown & Robinson, 2006; Parker, Berger, & Manson,
2002). It is essential that computational models are based on micro-
foundations, which are not only theoretically sound but are also empir-
ically justiﬁable, especially if effectiveness of policy interventions is to
be assessed.
This paper presents an innovative agent-based model (ABM) of a
spatially explicit empirical housing market– RHEA (Risks and Hedonics
in Empirical Agent-based land market model) – and explores its behav-
ior under various micro-foundations. 1 Several recent papers provide
comprehensive reviews of ABM methodology applied to socio-
economic processes in space ( An, 2012; Filatova, Verburg, Parker, &
Stannard, 2013; Heckbert, Baynes, & Reeson, 2010; Matthews, Gilbert,
Roach, Polhill, & Gotts, 2007; Schreinemachers & Berger, 2011) and re-
view the state-of-the art in agent-based land market models (LMMs)
(Ettema, 2011; Huang, Parker, Filatova, & Sun, 2013; Magliocca,
Saﬁrova, McConnell, & Walls, 2011; Parker & Filatova, 2008 ). Spatial
ABMs applied on an urban scale generally either tend to use a compre-
hensive empirical landscape setting and some data to lay foundations
for agents’ behavior omitting theoretical assumptions about economic
processes ( Benenson, 1998; Brown, 2006; Dawson, Peppe, & Wang,
2011; Yin & Muller, 2007), or use a stylized landscape and little empir-
ical micro-foundations of agents ’ behavior with theoretically-elegant
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397–413
⁎ Address: Centre for Studies in Technology and Sustainable Development, University of
Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands.
E-mail address: t.ﬁlatova@utwente.nl.
1 By micro-foundations this paper means the basic principles that lay out the founda-
tions of individual agents ’ behavior. These include a speci ﬁc theoretical basis as well as
empirical information that is used to parameterize and/or validate these behaviors. The
ability to generate market level phenomena and patterns based on detailed empirical data
and theoretically-sound micro behavior provides a novel advancement in ABM.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2014.06.007
0198-9715/© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ceus

economic solutions ( Ettema, 2011; Filatova, van der Veen, & Parker,
2009; Magliocca et al., 2011 ). There is a gap in the ﬁeld: the
feasibility of combining empirics and theory when designing
micro-foundations of agents ’ behavior in spatial markets is
underexplored.
ABMs are particularly strong in integrating socio-economic and
environmental modeling, often within a spatial landscape, across
scales, as well as exploring various market phenomena by going
beyond stylized assumptions of equilibrium economic models. Yet,
ABMs are often weak in connecting to empirical data when parame-
terizing various attributes and validating decision-making processes
of agents ( Boero & Squazzoni, 2005; Poggio, Lo, LeBaron, & Chan,
1999 ). In fact validation and parameterization is one of the main
research challenges in the ﬁeld of ABM ( Filatova et al., 2013;
Heckbert, Baynes et al., 2010; Heckbert & Bishop, 2011; Robinson
et al., 2007; Smajgl, Brown, Va lbuena, & Huigen, 2011; Windrum,
Fagiolo, & Moneta, 2007 ). The bene ﬁts of connecting ABMs to
empirical data are obvious. Firstly, while purely theoretical ABMs
have an important added value ( Boero & Squazzoni, 2005 ), their
application for policy analysis is contingent on the use of empirical
data for parameterization and validation. A consistent use of
empirical data increases trust of various stakeholders in any model,
including ABMs ( Janssen & Ostrom, 2006 ). Secondly, ABMs are
extremely ﬂexible on the choice of behavioral rules at individual
agent level and on the structure and frequency of interactions. This
forces a modeler to face a choice of numerous variability in a model
instantiation ( Polhill et al., 2014 ). The parameterization of an ABM
with the actual data ﬁlters the nearly-unlimited collection of options
for micro-foundations or parameter settings to an easier-to-handle
parameter set that produces an ABM world resembling a realistic
case. Thirdly, data on individual choices over time and on the
structure of human interactions permits an examination of the
theoretical consequences of more realistic assumptions ( Janssen &
Ostrom, 2006 ). Empirical data could be used to design and parame-
terize realistic micro-foundat ions of an ABM or to validate macro
outcomes of a simulation but preferably both ( Boero & Squazzoni,
2005 ). Empirical methods for building ABMs such as surveys,
stylized facts, archival and census data, participatory modeling,
expert knowledge elicitation, participant observation, ﬁeld and
laboratory experiments, and GIS data have been extensively
reviewed ( Boero & Squazzoni, 2005; Heckbert, Baynes et al., 2010;
Janssen & Ostrom, 2006; Robinson et al., 2007; Smajgl et al., 2011 ).
Advantages of using empirical data for an ABM are vast. However,
there are also challenges, which may include: (1) maintaining a link
between empirical data and a theory, assumptions of which an ABM
is supposed to relax, (2) scaling up observed behavioral data to
large population of arti ﬁcial agents, (3) capturing behavioral change
through time when empirical data often provides only a snapshot,
(4) a necessity to collect case-speci ﬁc data to match the design of
an ABM, (5) dif ﬁculty in replication and generalization of the results
s i n c es o m em e t h o d so fc o l l e c t i n gd a t at h a ti ss u i t a b l ef o rA B M sa r e
difﬁcult to reproduce, (6) translation of qualitative data into
formal rules when coding ( Heckbert, Adamowicz, Boxall, &
Hanneman, 2010; Janssen & Ostrom, 2006; Robinson et al., 2007;
Smajgl et al., 2011; Valbuena, Ve rburg, & Bregt, 2008; Windrum
et al., 2007 ).
An empirical ABM of an urban economic system, which is well
grounded in economic theory and could use readily available spatial
data and economic empirical analysis, is not available yet. The RHEA
model aims to address this gap. Speci ﬁcally, theoretical micro-
foundations of residential household agents’ behavior are framed with-
in urban economics theory (Alonso, 1964; Frame, 1998; Wu, 2001)a n d
use adaptive price expectations. At the same time RHEA operates in a re-
alistic GIS landscape where realtor and households agents form ask and
bid prices using empirical hedonic price functions, i.e. empirically-
estimated willingness-to-pay functions based on detailed spatial
attributes of the property stock. Moreover, empirical micro-
foundations include real income distributions, and behavioral rules of
traders in a housing market validated through an interview with a US
realtor.2 The interview shed light on the fact (i) that sellers set prices
based on realtors predictions, (ii) that buyers anchor their bids on
seller’s ask prices, (iii) that an outcome of price negotiations depend
on market power of traders and their opportunity costs, and (iv) that
prices, at which realtors anticipate to sell a house, depend not only on
spatial and structural attributes of a house but also change dynamically
with market conditions. In addition, some quantitative parameters of
the models, such as percent of differences between bid and ask prices,
and a period of recent sales realtors take into account when forming
prices expectations, were derived from the interview. RHEA is applied
to a coastal town in North Carolina, USA where data on both coastal
amenities and ﬂood risks affect locations choices and price dynamics.
The innovativeness of the current model is threefold: (i) in compar-
ison to economic studies of land use (Irwin & Bockstael, 2002)R H E Ae x -
plicitly simulates the emergence of property prices under adaptive price
expectations of heterogeneous agents, including the emergence of car-
dinally new trends in prices and their spatial distribution, (ii) in com-
parison to other agent-based LMMs, which are stylized abstract
models ( Ettema, 2011; Gilbert, Hawksworth, & Swinney, 2009;
Magliocca et al., 2011; Parker & Filatova, 2008 ), the current model
makes a step forward toward empirical modeling of ABM land markets
by using actual hedonic studies and distribution of households incomes;
(iii) in comparison to other empirical spatial ABMs of urban phenomena
(Brown et al., 2008; Robinson et al., 2007 ) RHEA has a full LMM with
adaptive price expectations, which allows for the emergence of prices
and may lead to qualitatively different trends in spatial patterns
(Parker et al., 2011).
The primary goal of this paper is to provide theﬁrst detailed descrip-
tion of the RHEA LMM with a special focus on micro-foundations and
methodological aspects related to merging theoretical and empirical ap-
proaches (Section2). In addition, a series of experiments is presented to
explore how the model’s micro-foundations impact aggregated spatial
urban system dynamics (Section 3). Conclusions and future work are
outlined in Section 4.
2. Model description (ODD + D)
The RHEA LMM is described below employing the standard ODD
protocol for ABMs ( Grimm et al., 2010 ), which was recently extended
to account for human decision making– O D D+D( Mueller et al., 2013).
2.1. Overview
2.1.1. Purpose
RHEA aims to provide a methodological platform to integrate adap-
tive economic behavior into the spatial landscape using urban econom-
ics theory and traditional data sources. This article presents the base
model but speci ﬁc experiments could be designed to explore a range
of research questions that are dif ﬁcult to tackle with other economic
or geographic tools, which rely exclusively on static agents ’ behavior
and past data ( Filatova & Bin, 2013 ). In particular, how do changes in
preferences or risk perceptions capitalize in property price? How do
structural non-marginal shifts in land markets emerge from the bottom
and propagate up to the top? How do economic land use systems react
to climate change? RHEA allows direct modeling of interactions of many
heterogeneous agents in a land market over a heterogeneous spatial
landscape simplifying further coupling of economic models with eco-
logical ones. As in other ABMs of markets, RHEA helps to understand
how aggregated patterns and economic indices result from many indi-
vidual interactions of economic agents (Tesfatsion, 2006).
2 An open question interview was conducted in 2012 with L. Vidgop-Barg a practicing
realtor with extensive experience.
398 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

The model could be used by scientists to explore methodological
questions (e.g. to compare the performance of various expectation for-
mation algorithms with different information update time, and study
the effects of agents heterogeneity ( Huang, Parker, Sun, & Filatova,
2013) and by policy-makers to explore the extent of changes in eco-
nomic system, e.g. in response to adverse consequences of climate
change and impact of adaptation policies (Stern, 2008).
2.1.2. Entities, state variables and scales
The main agents in the model are households willing to buy and sell
properties in a coastal city, real estate agents who observe market dy-
namics and form expectations, and parcels that can be residential or
non-residential where the former represent spatial goods. The three
types of agents are connected through the market (Fig. 1).
State variables that are used in this base model are listed in
Tables 1–3.
The model is spatially explicit, using empirical GIS data from Bin
et al. (2008)uploaded at initialization. The empirical landscape includes
cadaster data on non-residential and residential parcels, as well as
ocean and river areas. At initialization each residential property is pop-
ulated with an economic agent. The size of residential parcels varies be-
tween 0.005 and 42.4 acres. The model operates on a spatial scale of one
or few coastal towns. Technically, a larger spatial area can be represent-
ed but this slows down the simulation. One time step in RHEA is equal to
1m o n t h .3
2.1.3. Process overview and scheduling
The main process in the ABM is trading of residential properties and
allocation of households in a town. Each time step the trade process
consists of several phases: listing of vacant spatial goods in a market
by sellers, search for the best location under budget constraint by
buyers, formation and submission of bids by buyers to sellers, evalua-
tion of received bids by sellers, price negotiation, transaction and regis-
tration of trade, andﬁnally updating of market expectations by realtors.
The sequence of events in one time step is presented inFig. 2. RHEA bor-
rows some elements of the base trade ﬂow logic of the ALMA model
(Filatova, Parker, & van der Veen, 2009; Filatova, Parker, & van der
Veen, 2011). As in ALMA, a simulation in RHEA starts with sellers put-
ting properties on the market, while buyers select a property to bid on
by ﬁnding a maximum-utility parcel under budget constrains. However,
RHEA has several fundamental differences compared to ALMA. Namely,
it employs new procedures: (1) to initialize sellers (box I,Fig. 2), (2) to
account for empirical landscape and hedonic price function (box II and
III), (3) to estimate utility function assuming substitutability between
a housing and a composite good (box V), (4) to select the cheapest
property among those with similar levels of utility (box VI), (5) to real-
ize price negotiation procedure (box IX), and (6) to perform adaptive
price expectations (box XII and XIII). The primary mechanisms that
are innovative in RHEA compared to the rest of the ﬁeld are the empir-
ical setup of ask and bid prices, the introduction of realtor agents who
update price expectations for heterogeneous spatial goods, and the de-
tailed modeling of price negotiations.
2.2. Design concepts
2.2.1. Theoretical and empirical background
The RHEA model combines the microeconomic demand, supply, and
bidding foundations of spatial economics with the spatial heterogeneity
of econometric models in a single methodological platform. It models a
coastal city where both coastal amenities and ﬂooding disamenities
drive land market outcomes, facilitating separate analysis of the effects
of each driver on land rents. RHEA starts with a conventional urban eco-
nomic model and gradually relaxes the assumptions of perfect rational-
ity and homogeneity among households as well as the assumption of an
instantly equilibrating land market. In particular, RHEA is grounded in a
Fig. 1. UML class diagram of the bilateral housing market: agents, their properties and functions (Section2.1.2). Associations between agents label either the nature of a relationship or the
roles of agents. The multiplicity notations indicate when the instances of classes are related to each other as one to one (‘1’ and ‘1’) or one to many ( ‘1’ and ‘1..*’).
3 The decision to choose a 1 month time step is because households that decide to buy a
house are likely to make several attempts a year. Besides realtors base their price expecta-
tions on the recent sales, i.e. 1–3 months, or up to 6 months or more if not enough trades
happened in an area (interview with L. Vidgop-Barg).
399T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

monocentric urban model (Alonso, 1964) enriched by coastal amenities
following (Wu, 2006; Wu & Plantinga, 2003)a n dﬂood hazard probabil-
ities following Frame (1998) . Thus, spatial goods in this agent-based
computational economics (ACE) market are quite heterogeneous differ-
entiated by distance to Central Business District CBD (D), coastal ameni-
ties (A), probability of hazard (P) and structural housing characteristics.
In RHEA heterogeneous household agents (buyers and sellers) ex-
change heterogeneous spatial goods (houses) via simulated bilateral
market interactions with decentralized price determination. Empirical
data are used to initialize spatial landscape, to parameterize agents ’
properties ( Table 2 ) and to de ﬁne the initial hedonic function ( Bin
et al., 2008), which real estate agents use for price predictions.
2.2.2. Individual decision-making
The household agents in the model are differentiated by their role
(A-marketStatus inFig. 1): buyers, sellers and inactive property owners.
The latter are associated with a certain property but do not perform any
actions4 except eventually deciding to become a seller. The behavior of
agents is explained below.
Sellers’behavior: at model initialization each property has an owner
and some of those may decide to put it for sale, i.e. become sellers (box I,
Fig. 2). The choice of property owners who are to become sellers occurs
in two stages in RHEA. First, every year the fraction of properties for sale
(Fsale) and its standard deviation is de ﬁned exogenously (Table 3). The
actual annual number of houses going for sale is a random number gen-
erated from the normal distribution based on these two. In the future
versions of the model this number could be made endogenous. Second-
ly, a decision regarding which owners are actually going to become
sellers has two alternative implementations. Speciﬁcally, they can either
be selected randomly or be based on utility (Eq. (2))– i.e. only the least-
satisﬁed households become sellers. In either case, the ﬁnal number of
sellers is equal to the number of properties for sale. As the simulation
goes on, settled households may decide to relocate following the select-
ed seller choice strategy (either random or least-satisﬁed agents).
At the beginning of a trading period active sellers announce theirask
prices.T h e yd os ob yr e q u e s t i n gr e g r e s s i o nc o e fﬁcients from the hedon-
ic analysis of the current period (box II, Fig. 2) and applying them to
their property (box III). At the initialization stage this hedonic function
and coefﬁcients come fromBin et al. (2008). As the model runs and new
transactions occur real estate agents are rerunning the hedonic analysis.
Regression coefﬁcients – i.e. willingness to pay for a speciﬁca t t r i b u t eo f
a property of an average household in a current market – may change
driven by the in ﬂow of new households with different preferences for
locations or potentially dynamic perceptions regarding ﬂood risks.
After buyers make their choices (boxes IV –VII, Fig. 2), all sellers check
how many bid-offers they received. They choose the highest bid to en-
gage in price negotiations (box VIII,Fig. 2). The transaction priceis de-
ﬁned through a price negotiation procedure, which is based on bid and
ask prices and relative market power of traders (see Section 2.2.6).
Seller’s price formation (Section 2.2.3) and choices in price negotia-
tion depend on the past events and experiences, thus they adapt to
changing endogenous variables. Speci ﬁcally, sellers have a memory
where they record a number of consequent unsuccessful trade attempts
(NUSTr). Each seller has a threshold value ( Dneg), which he compares to
the difference between his ask price and the highest submitted bid
price for his property during price negotiation procedure (Section2.2.6).
At the start of a seller’s trading history, hisDneg is equal to one month of
his mortgage estimated based on the price at which he bought the
house (Htran). As his NUSTr grows, the seller adapts his threshold value
Dneg for one extra month of mortgage, i.e.:
Dneg ¼ kH /C2 Htran /C4 12 /C2ð 1 þ NUSTrÞð 1Þ
Here kH is a coefﬁcient to translate the property price (Htran) into an
annual payment.
Currently RHEA does not include modeling of developer’s behavior.
Thus, the pull of residential housing is constant.
Buyers’ behavior: at the beginning of a trading period all active
buyers start searching for a property that maximizes their utility
Table 1
State variables related to the spatial landscape of RHEA.a
Variable name Brief description Value
I. Spatial landscape (GIS parcel data)
ID A unique ID of a GIS parcel (spatial good) ***
Residential? Indicates whether a parcel is under residential or non-residential use [0;1]
Price An attribute of a parcel where ﬁrst seller’s asking price and then market transaction price are recorded. Property prices are in 2004
dollars following the dataset of Bin et al (2008)
Endogenously
determined
onSale Indicates whether this parcel is for sale during in the current time step [0;1]
timeOnMarket Counts the months which this parcel is for sale on a market Endogenously
determined
P-location X and Y coordinates of a parcel ***
bathroom Number of bathrooms Uploaded from GIS
datasetbedrooms Number of bedrooms
age Year house was built subtracted from 2004
sqft Total structure square footage
lotSize Total lot size measured in acres
newHome Dummy variable for new home (1 if sold within a year after built, 0 otherwise)
postFirm Dummy variable for post-FIRM properties (1 if post-FIRM, 0 otherwise)
probabilityOfFlood Probability of ﬂooding (0, 1:100, 1:500)
coastalFront Dummy variable for the ﬁrst row from coastal water (1 if on, 0 otherwise)
distanceAmen Distance in feet to the sound or Intracoastal waterways
distanceCBD Distance in feet to downtown Morehead City (town1 M)
distHwy Distance in feet to nearest highway
distPark Distance in feet to nearest park, forest, or game land
town1 M Dummy variable for a township (1 if Morehead, 0 otherwise)
town15B Dummy variable for a township (1 if Beaufort, 0 otherwise)
kH Coefﬁcient that translates overall property price into an annual payment 1/15
a Note: here we list only those agents and their state variables, which are used for the simulations done for this paper. Other implementations of this model published elsewhere may
have different state variables and values.
4 For the next version of the model we plan to include other interactions, such as opin-
ion exchange regarding risks, in which property owners who are not active seller yet will
also participate.
400 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

(boxes IV–VI, Fig. 2). Household’s utility depends on a combination of
composite (z)a n dh o u s i n g(s) goods which is affordable for her budget
(Y) net of transport costs (T(D)):
U ¼ sα z1/C0 α Aγ
or
U ¼ sα ðY /C0 TðDÞ/C0 kH HaskÞ1/C0 α Aγ ð2Þ
Preferences for housing good (α) and amenities (γ)a sw e l la se x o g -
enous incomes (Y) are heterogeneous across household agents.
When choosing a location in a costal town with designated ﬂood
zones, a household operates under the conditions of uncertainty. Thus,
she in fact maximizes her expected utility (EU):
EU ¼ PiU F þð 1 /C0 PiÞUNF ð3Þ
where UF is the households utility in case of a ﬂood event, UNF is utility
in the case of noﬂood, and Pi is a subjective risk perception of a buyer. In
economic literature individual, possibly biased, risk perception is often
formalized by means of altering objective probability of ﬂooding (P).
Thus, Pi = P ± Δ where Δ is an individual bias that can be changing
over time.
U F ¼ sα ðY /C0 TðDÞ/C0 kH Hask /C0 L /C0 IP þ ICÞ1/C0 α Aγ ð4Þ
UNF ¼ sα ðY /C0 TðDÞ/C0 kH Hask /C0 IPÞ1/C0 α Aγ ð5Þ
Here L is the damage in the case ofﬂood, IP is annual ﬂood insurance
premium, IC is insurance coverage in the case of a disaster. It is assumed
that housing search is costly, thus, households do not search for a global
maximum but explore a subset5 of properties only, from which they se-
lect the one that delivers the highest utility. Thus, buyers do not operate
under perfect information.
Buyers have subjective perceptions of ﬂooding probability, which
may be biased compared to the objective probabilityP. Risk perceptions
could be made dynamic over time. The simulations reported in this
paper use objective risk perceptions.
After a buyer has found the property that gives her the maximum
utility, she submits her bid price to a seller (box VII, Fig. 2). Buyers bid
differently depending on how long a property is on a market and on
their relative market power (Eqs. (6), (7)). During the interview with
the US realtor it became clear that a buyers’ price is anchored to a sellers’
one: buyers bid between 3% and 5% below ask price, and up to 7 –10%
below ask price if they want to be aggressive and if a property is on
the market for a long time:
∈½ðHask /C0 hÞ; Hask/C138ð 6Þ
5 The number is user-deﬁned. In this simulation we used 10.
Table 2
State variables related to household agents in the RHEA model.
II. Households (traders) – parent class
A-marketStatus A market status of a household agent in a current time step Buyer, seller, traded
A-alpha Household preference for a spatial good over a composite good. Source:( Heckbert and Smajgl 2005 ) 0.3
A-gamma Household preferences for coastal amenities. Source:( Wu and Plantinga 2003 ) 0.5
ﬁxedAlpha Boolean, determines whether agents have homogeneous or heterogeneous preferences for spatial goods or environmental
amenities
[0;1]
ﬁxedGamma
A-utility Agent ’s utility for a speci ﬁc spatial good Eq. (3)
A-budget Household annual income (empirical distribution/average empirical). Source: USA statistics a. The statistical data on income
distribution for the Carteret county (NC) was available for 2011; to match the price levels of hedonic analysis the incomes were
adjusted to 2004 prices using Consumer Price Index b
(8362–209,044)/51,939
A-trav.costs Agent ’s travel costs per unit of distance. Source: ( Wu and Plantinga 2003 ) 0.284
A-myprice Stores the value of a bid or ask price agent is ready to pay for a certain parcel Eqs. (6) –(8)
A-refused Counts how many times an agent did not succeed in buying or selling a property ***
II.1 Buyer – subclass of traders class
A-delta (Dneg) Difference between bid and ask price, which buyer is ready to accept in price negotiations; equals to her monthly rent Endogenously
determined
Bid price Buyer ’s bid price for a speci ﬁc spatial good Section 2.2.2
II.2 Seller – subclass of traders class
A-delta (Dneg) Difference between bid and ask prices, which seller is ready to accept in price negotiations; equals to his monthly rent and grows
with timeOnMarket
Eq. (1)
Ask price Asking price the seller assigns to the cell he owns Sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3
a United States Census Bureau, http://factﬁnder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml.
b United States Department of Labor, http://www.bls.gov/cpi/.
Table 3
State variables related to real-estate agents and market in RHEA.
III. Real-estate agent
R-hedonic-list List of regression coef ﬁcients of a hedonic model in a certain time step, also serves as memory Section 2.2.3
R-hedonics Adaptive or statics
R-learning-strategy A strategy to update market expectations
IV. Market
fraction_on_sale (Fsale) sd_fraction_on_sale Share of owners who decide to become sellers (mean and standard deviation) 0.25
0.02
SellerChoice Method to de ﬁne which owners become sellers Random
NumberOfBuyers Number of newcomers entering the market every time step Equals to new sellers
tradeCode The code, with which a trade attempt is marked Section 2.2.6
NOfTrades Number of trades Endogenous
401T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

where hi s a random number between 0 and 10% of the ask price of a
seller.
If it is a sellers ’ market – that is, there is excess demand for certain
areas – then buyers need to be more strategic and bid high enough to as-
sure they actually get the property that maximizes their utility.
Hbid∈½Hask; ðHask þ hÞ/C138 ð 7Þ
In the current implementation of the model the sign of h is deter-
mined randomly. RHEA departs from previous work ( Filatova, Parker
et al., 2009; Magliocca et al., 2011), which introduced a variable to rep-
resent a relative excess of supply or demand in a market, and by multi-
plication pushed housing prices up or down. Instead of formally
imposing an increasing or decreasing price trend in the code, RHEA
allows natural emergence of such a phenomena entirely through agents’
interactions. Speci ﬁcally, less attractive or overpriced properties get
fewer bids and thus are more likely to get a decrease in price (i.e. com-
petition between sellers). At the same time, a more desirable property
in general attracts more buyers and is likely to have an increase in
price since sellers would choose the highest bid (i.e. competition
among buyers). However, in any case buyer ’s bid price should not ex-
ceed her reservation price, which means that her annual payment
should not exceed 30% of her annual income (Heckbert & Smajgl, 2005).
In case buyers are not able toﬁnd a property, which they like and are
able to afford, they leave the town. It occurs afterﬁve unsuccessful trade
attempts. This assumption seems reasonable since the scale of the
model is one town with only 3588 residential properties, and it is logical
to search elsewhere in the neighboring area.
Fig. 2. Dynamics of the trade process: a sequence of actions, which agents perform within 1 time step of the bilateral agent-based housing market with expectations formation (Sections
2.1.3 and 2.2).
402 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

2.2.3. Learning
One of the core decisions in decentralized ACE markets is the learn-
ing process regarding prices (LeBaron, 2006; Tesfatsion, 2006). It is chal-
lenging to model price expectations in urban property markets
characterized by high heterogeneity of goods, which are infrequently
traded. While ACE has made major progress in modeling markets of ho-
mogeneous goods ( Arthur, Durlauf, & Lane, 1997; Kirman & Vriend,
2001; Tesfatsion & Judd, 2006 ) land is a good with very diverse attri-
butes. The same house in a different location may have a
disproportionally different price as do two houses with different struc-
tural characterizes in the same neighborhood. Modeling price expecta-
tions in housing markets needs an introduction of a mediator who
learns the efﬁcient price of any unique house and who often participates
in transactions of such infrequently purchased goods as a house
(Ettema, 2011; Gilbert et al., 2009; Magliocca et al., 2011; Parker &
Filatova, 2008). As the mediator engages in many transactions, the soci-
ety of agents relies on collective information about recent transaction
prices. Thus, it is a collective learning process. The existing spatial
ABMs that employ learning algorithms to support trading process in a
land market (Balmann & Happe, 2000; Magliocca et al., 2011) deal still
with relatively homogenous spatial goods, often differentiated only by
the distance to CBD and size. The challenge here is to account for
other attributes of housing, (up to 14 GIS attributes in our dataset in-
cluding amenities and risks) that affect trading behavior.
Real estate agent and formation of price expectations: RHEA builds on
previous research on agent-based LMMs and introduces real estate
agents who observe successful transactions and form price expecta-
tions. Implementation of adaptive price expectations is realized in two
stages: (1) trace housing price changes accounting for spatial goods het-
erogeneity, and (2) capture market dynamics. The assumptions on the
process of real estate agent price formation and negotiations between
buyers and sellers were validated in an open-question interview with
the US real estate agent.
To model the ﬁrst stage of price expectation RHEA relies on basics of
empirical research in urban and regional economics. In particular, ac-
cording to Hedonic Price Modeling a house is a bundle of quantitative
and qualitative characteristics (Rosen, 1974). Thus, a price of a residen-
tial parcel can be expressed as a function of those attributes– presented
as 14 GIS attributes ( Table 1 ). Marginal implicit prices can be
interpreted as marginal willingness to pay of a representative house-
hold for speci ﬁc housing attributes. This application of RHEA adopts
the hedonic function estimated for the area based on the GIS data
used to initialize the landscape (Bin et al., 2008):
lnHtran ¼ β0 þ
Xn
i¼1
βixi þ ε ð8Þ
Here ln Htran is the log of transaction price, xi is a variable for the ith
housing attribute (structural, neighborhood and environmental),β are
regression coefﬁcients, and ε is the error term.
At initialization realtors are endowed with coefﬁcients of the original
hedonic analysis of Bin et al. (2008 , Model 4). At the end of each time
step, all successful transactions get registered in a ﬁle (trade.csv) to-
gether with all the attributes of traded agents and properties. Each
month a real estate agent checks if there are enough transactions to
run a comparable sales analysis. If yes, then he runs a hedonic analysis
on the new transactions from the last 3–12 trading periods. If the num-
ber of realized transactions is not sufﬁcient to capture the variation on
housing prices in the regression analysis, then the horizon is extended
for another month. Regression analysis based on these recent transac-
tions is realized by employing the R-extension of Netlogo ( Thiele &
Grimm, 2010), which makes it possible to have a direct coupling of R-
scripts and the Netlogo ACE model. Eventually, the new coef ﬁcients
got recorded into realtors memory. It is also possible to switch off this
stage of adaptive price expectation by setting up R-hedonics on ‘Static’.
In this case the hedonic model based on empirical 2004 analysis ( Bin
et al., 2008) will be used throughout the whole simulation.
During the second stage of price expectations a real estate agent may
decide to apply one of the price learning strategies to suggest the ﬁnal
asking price to a seller. Following Magliocca et al. (2011) RHEA uses
four economic prediction models: mean, projection, mirror and regional
models. Whether to activate or not the second stage of price expectation
is determined by a user currently.
2.2.4. Individual sensing
Information about realtors ’ estimates of a property price is public.
However, buyers are assumed to be boundedly-rational. Bounded ratio-
nality captures the fact that an individual is not able to foresee all the
consequences of his choice, take into account all the factors, and has lim-
ited computing abilities (Simon, 1997). Searching for a house in reality
is very costly (time-wise and money-wise). Not all properties are listed
in online databases, choice and viewing of listed properties is time-
consuming. Since a global optimum is not likely to be identi ﬁed in
real-world housing markets, buyers do not search for the maximum
throughout the whole landscape, but rather ﬁnd a local maximum
among a set of randomly chosen cells. Yet, at this stage the costs of infor-
mation gathering by buyers are not explicitly included in the model.
Sellers’ ask prices are public information but a buyer is not aware of
the bids other buyers make.
2.2.5. Individual prediction
Traders rely on pricing information, which realtors provide. The pre-
diction involving learning algorithms is present only if real estate agents
activate the second stage of expectation formation. If the latter is not ac-
tivated, then agents make decisions based only on the current state of
the landscape and the current market.
2.2.6. Interaction
Agents are involved in market interactions with each other:
(a) buyers and sellers engage in direct interactions during negotiations,
(b) residential property prices are emergent outcomes of direct buyers
and sellers interactions; (c) buyers compete with each other submitting
bids to the same seller; (d) sellers update their threshold for accepting
the difference between bid and ask prices ( Dneg) if they were not suc-
cessful during a trade period (for details on b, c and d see Section 2.2.2
and Fig. 2). The outcomes of these interactions also indirectly affect fu-
ture trades through real estate agents updating their price expectations
(Section 2.2.3). Let us elaborate on the ﬁrst type of interactions, as it
constitutes one of the innovative aspects of the RHEA model. This type
of interactions gets activated during the trade process (box IX Fig. 2).
Price negotiations in land market ABMs are often presented in a sim-
pliﬁed way – as an arithmetic or geometric average between bid and ask
prices. The RHEA model aims to bring in more realistic price negotia-
tions procedure. Speciﬁcally, buyers and sellers do not simply settle on
a price, which is an average of bid and ask, but rather play with their
market power when negotiating. Moreover, during the interview with
the US realtor it became clear that a buyers ’ price is always anchored
to that of a sellers. Both prices are linked to the market average sug-
gested by realtors. Yet, bids can vary because of the buyers or seller mar-
ket or depending on how much a buyer wants the property. These
processes are captured through competition on sellers ’ as well as on
buyers’ sides in the new price negotiation procedure (Fig. 3). Speciﬁcal-
ly, if a seller has at least one bid submitted he engages in price negotia-
tions with the buyer who offered the highest bid price. Naturally, if her
bid price is higher than seller’s ask price, then the trade is successful and
ﬁnal transaction price is equal to this bid (box (1), Fig. 3). If the highest
bid is below the original ask price, then the market power of agents
plays a role (box (2) Fig. 3). Speciﬁcally, if the seller has more than 1
bid offered, then the highest-bid buyer is the ﬁrst one to reconsider
his bid price. The highest-bid buyer checks if the opportunity costs of
waiting another month for another trade attempt (her Dneg)a r e
403T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

comparable to the difference between the bid and ask prices (box
(3) Fig. 3 ). Here Dneg of a buyer is operationalized as one month of
renting an average house in the city,6 which is updated with time as res-
idential housing prices change. If it is beneﬁcial for the buyer to accept
the ask price instead of waiting another month for a trade attempt,
then she accepts the ask price and trade is successfully registered. How-
ever, if the seller receives only one offer-bid, then he is the one to recon-
sider his ask price (box (4) Fig. 3 ). In particular, he compares the
difference between bid and ask prices to the opportunity costs of
waiting another month (his Dneg) and accepts the bid price, if compari-
son is in its favor. The Dneg of a seller is operationalized as one month of
mortgage for his property at the start of sellers trading history and gets
updated with every unsuccessful trade attempt (Section 2.2.2). If the
seller and the buyer do not agree on a price the negotiation fails. Poten-
tially one may consider advancing the negotiation procedure at the
stage of box (4), Fig. 3, by making sellers estimate their probability of
selling in a given time at a given price and have this probability updated
as in Ettema (2011).
Considering the processes in Figs. 2 and 3 the overall trade process
may result in the following outcomes, coded with ‘trade codes ’
(Table 4).
2.2.7. Collectives
Agents do not form any networks or other collectives.
2.2.8. Heterogeneity
Traders can be heterogeneous in their preferences for spatial goods
over composite and for coastal amenities, in their risk perceptions and
in their budgets. To explore research questions at hand RHEA allows
setting up combinations of sources of heterogeneity as well as initiating
homogenous agents by varying parameters such as A-budget,ﬁxedAlfa/
Gamma and their average values (Table 2).
Buyer, seller and real estate agents have different decision-making
rules, as elucidated in 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 above.
2.2.9. Stochasticity
When the population of agents is created as heterogeneous in their
attributes (preferences, risk perceptions, incomes) during initialization
and consequent steps (for incoming buyers), speciﬁc values of those at-
tributes are assigned randomly to agents. Moreover, during the model
run, irrespectively of whether traders activated during the simulation
are heterogeneous or homogenous, the randomness comes in when
property owners decide to become sellers (if random strategy is cho-
sen), when buyers set up their bid prices, and when the number of in-
coming households is determined every step.
2.2.10. Observation
Urban property prices emerge as a result of bilateral trades between
buyers and sellers with diverse incomes and speci ﬁc preferences in a
heterogeneous landscape. This can be re ﬂected on a map as a color-
gradient of property prices changing over time. Furthermore, RHEA
monitors a set of macro-scale measures such as total property value in
the area, average rent in a city, average price in a non- ﬂooded vs.
hazard-prone areas, and aggregate utility of settled households. These
aggregated outcomes are important for the understanding of price dy-
namics as people with different incomes and preferences arrive to the
studied areas, and for tracing agents’ welfare over time.
Moreover, at the end of each time step there are a number of tables
(csv ﬁles), which get updated. Speciﬁcally, each trade attempt (success-
ful and unsuccessful) gets recorded in the trade.csv table together with
all attributes of the buyer and the seller and the property in question,
what allows running new hedonic analysis when needed. In addition,
realtors record their current regression coef ﬁcients of hedonic model
6 RHEA does not model a residential renting market explicitly. Thus, the average rent in
the city is equal to average mortgage payment in this city and is the same for all buyers. In
case a rental market is modeled explicitly in parallel to the ownership market, the monthly
rent would be heterogeneous across households.
Fig. 3.The simulationﬂow of the price negotiation process (Section2.2.6). Here: buyers’ opportunity costs of waiting another month for another trade attempt (Dneg of a buyer) are equal to
1 month of rent, seller’s opportunity costs of waiting another month (Dneg of a seller) are equal to 1 month of mortgage. Both of them are updated following unsuccessful trades.
404 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

in the realtors.csv ﬁle, so that the dynamics of price expectation forma-
tion can be traced over time.
2.3. Details
2.3.1. Implementation details
The model is implemented in Netlogo v5.0.4 (Wilensky, 1999)u s i n g
GIS7 and R (Thiele & Grimm, 2010) extensions. R-scripts are called from
within Netlogo during each time step. The model will be accessible via
OpenABM.org at the end of the project (2015–2016).
2.3.2. Initialization
The model is initialized with either two coastal cities in North Caro-
lina, USA, or only one of them (Beaufort or Morehead) with 34,923,
7106 or 24,980 GIS parcels, respectively. About half of those parcels
are residential, other represent water or undeveloped areas. The num-
ber of residential owner-agents at initialization for e.g. Beaufort city is
3588, the number of sellers and buyers is user-de ﬁned. The properties
going for sale at initialization vary across model runs. The incomes, pref-
erences and risk perceptions of household agents are set at initialization
according to the user settings (see Sections 2.2.8 and 2.2.9).
2.3.3. Input data
In this paper RHEA is applied to the coastal town of Beaufort. The
area is in general low lying and is prone to ﬂooding with probability of
1:100 and 1:500 in certain zones. At initialization RHEA uploads vector
data from multiple GIS data-sets on the locations of residential housing,
coastal amenities (measured in terms of distance from coastal water
and sound, and a Boolean measure of waterfront), ﬂood probabilities,
distances to the CBD and national parks, and data on structural charac-
teristics of properties ( Table 1). Distance to CBD in the GIS dataset is
measured as the distance to the nearest main employment center in
the area – a neighboring town Morehead (Bin et al., 2008). In addition
at initialization realtor-agents get the empirical hedonic function ( Bin
et al., 2008 ) based on the real estate transactions from 2000 to 2004
after a period of active hurricane seasons from middle of 1990s to
2003. Data on households’ incomes and preferences is taken from vari-
ous sources (Table 2).
2.3.4. Submodels
The submodels described in Fig. 2 are explained in detail in
Section 2.2.
3. Results
3.1. Experiment settings
The experiments presented here are for the city of Beaufort, USA
(Fig. 4 ). The area in our GIS dataset contains 7106 parcels, 3588 of
which are residential. Among residential parcels 50% are located in the
zone with zero ﬂood occurrence, 27% and 23% of residential properties
are in 1:100 and 1:500 zones respectively. The characteristics of resi-
dential parcels vary as described in Table 5.
To test the effect of various micro-foundations ﬁve experiments
were run ( Table 6 ). The ﬁrst experiment serves as a benchmark, i.e.
the most simpliﬁed micro-foundations of agents’ behavior are used. It
demonstrates the behavior of a representative agent without any adap-
tation. Further experiments introduce the heterogeneity of agents in
disposable incomes, which comes from statistical data. Then heteroge-
neity in preferences and adaptive price expectations are gradually
added.
3.2. Observation on micro-foundations #1: introducing empirical data into
the landscape and agents’behavior
RHEA attempts to bring together theoretical micro-foundations of
urban economics and traditionally available empirical data. A major
challenge on this path toward empirics is that one needs to use various
sources of data: aggregated (e.g. incomes here) and micro-level data
(individual property prices), data for a speci ﬁc geographical location
(parcel-level data) and average country level data (preferences for spa-
tial goods over composite goods or for amenities). When various data
sources are merged in an agent-based market it is quite likely that
trader-agents endowed with certain preferences and incomes may not
necessary represent the population that was active on the actual coastal
property market during the period, for which hedonic analyses and con-
sequently housing prices are estimated. Thus, an ACE market would
need to adjust the empirically-de ﬁned demand function, i.e. hedonic
function, with the simulated demand that emerged from individual de-
mands of agents endowed with empirical data from other sources. As
Fig. 5 demonstrates in RHEA it happens primarily during the ﬁrst time
step when all prices jump signiﬁcantly, even in the base case of fully ho-
mogeneous traders and static realtors in Exp1, to catch up with the cur-
rent simulated demand. Modiﬁcations in traders and realtors behavior
as well as spatial heterogeneity (average prices in safe, ﬂood-prone
and waterfront zones) may affect the extent of this sharp change in
price but not the fact of its occurrence (Exp2 –5, Fig. 5). The prices for
the most demanded properties – coastal front properties – adjust
quicker than for less attractive zones as a result of endogenous housing
market.
Let us consider price dynamics variation for four general types of
properties: average price of properties located in the safe zone
(Fig. 5a), in the zone with 1:100 chance of ﬂood occurrence ( Fig. 5b),
in the areas where probability of ﬂooding is 1:500 years ( Fig. 5c), and
for waterfront properties ( Fig. 5 d). It should be noted that there are
overlaps between some categories as waterfront properties may be ei-
ther in a safe or 1:100 ﬂood zone. On average the level of amenities
(measured as proximity to the coast and availability of the coastal
front) in the areas with 1:100 ﬂood occurrence are 45% higher than in
the safe one while in 1:500 ﬂood zone amenity levels constitute only
48% of amenity levels in the safe zone. A market with homogeneous
traders and static realtors (Exp1) produces quite stable price trends
over the ﬁrst three categories of properties except for the coastal front
properties. As preferences for coastal amenities are quite strong, the de-
mand for these areas is the highest and the market constantly adjusts by7 GIS extension of Netlogo: http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/docs/gis.html.
Table 4
A list of possible outcomes of the trade process.
Trade
code
Meaning
TC1 Trade attempt is successful when Bid > Ask
TC2 Trade attempt is successful when Bid b Ask, seller has more than 1 offer-bid, and buyer raises her bid
TC3 Trade attempt is successful when Bid b Ask, seller has more than 1 offer-bid, and seller lowers his ask to match the highest bid
TC4 Trade does not occur because Bid b Ask and traders did not agree
TC5 Trade attempt is successful when Bid b Ask, seller has only 1 offer-bid, and he lowers his ask
TC6 Traders did not agree since for both it is cheaper to wait another month
TC7 Trade does not occur because there were no bids offered to a seller
405T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

pushing prices up. Prices for properties in areas with 1:100 years ﬂood
occurrence are higher than in safe areas: between 4% (in Exp2 and
4) and 12–16% (in Exp5 and 3) price increase in 1:100 zone compared
to 2% (in Exp2 and 4) and 7 –11% (in Exp5 and 3) price increase in the
safe zone (Fig. 5bv s .5a). Properties in 1:100 zone have higher level of
coastal amenities compared to safe and more landward properties:
207 out of 975 parcels in 1:100 ﬂood zone are waterfront compared to
only 199 waterfront properties among 1777 ones in the safe zone. As
Bin et al. (2008) demonstrated in their hedonic analyses marginal will-
ingness to pay for amenities is higher than marginal price discount for
risk. One may also notice that price trends in the ﬂood zone of
1:500 years is controversial in markets with adaptive price expectations
(Exp3 and 5 in Fig. 5c) but has a clear downward trend in markets with
heterogeneous agents and static expectations (Exp2 and 4, Fig. 5 c).
Properties with a ﬂood occurrence 1:500 years have lower expected
utility than comparable properties in safe zone and at the same time
the level of environmental amenity is low (only 2 out of 408 properties
are waterfront) what makes them less attractive than 1:100 zone prop-
erties. The relatively low demand for those areas leads to a decrease in
the price trend.
Fig. 4. A map of property price gradient at initialization (Beaufort coastal town, North Caroline, USA). The darker the red color the higher a property price is. Green color symbolizes non-
residential properties; blue color stands for ocean.
406 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

3.3. Observation on micro-foundations #2: heterogeneity vs. homogeneity
Introduction of heterogeneity among traders leads to more success-
ful trade pairs. In particular, there is a better match between heteroge-
neous preferences for amenities as well as heterogeneous incomes
and available spatial goods compared to the choice a representative
agent faces (compare Exp2 to Exp1 in Fig. 6). Introduction of an empir-
ical distribution of budgets rather than an average budget for whole
population of traders adds more ﬂexibility to satisfy agents ’ needs
(compare Exp4 to Exp1 in Fig. 6), especially when preferences are also
heterogeneous (Exp4 and Exp2, Fig. 6).
Systematic test for the impacts of heterogeneity in budgets and pref-
erences in ABM LMMs have been performed and proven important for
Table 5
Heterogeneous attributes of housing goods in the GIS data set.
GIS parcel attribute Min Average Max
Number of bathrooms 0.5 1.7 6
House age 1 38.45 103
Sq. footage of a house 160 1581.2 4382
Lot size 0.005 0.92 42.39
Whether a house is in 1:100 ﬂood zone 0 0.27 1
Whether a house is in 1:500 ﬂood zone 0 0.23 1
Whether a property is at coastal front 0 0.11 1
Distance to amenity 1.8 1589.04 8445.6
Distance to CBD 7552.7 22781.9 69386.6
Distance to highway 50.7 2685 31313.3
Distance to parks 4331.9 14,412 36527.6
Table 6
Variation in the model settings among experiments.
Experiment
#
Preferences for
amenity, A-gamma
Household annual
income, A-budget
Realtor price
update, R-hedonics
Exp1 Homogeneous Homogeneous Static
Exp2 Homogeneous Empirical distribution Static
Exp3 Homogeneous Empirical distribution Adaptive
Exp4 Heterogeneous Empirical distribution Static
Exp5 Heterogeneous Empirical distribution Adaptive
Fig. 5. Average price of a residential property over time under various settings. Speciﬁcally: Exp1 assumes buyer and seller agents having homogeneous incomes and homogenous pref-
erences for amenities, realtors do not update price expectations based on the recent sales; Exp2 assumes buyer and seller agents having empirically-parameterized incomes and homog-
enous preferences for amenities, realtors do not update price expectations based on the recent sales; Exp3 assumes buyer and seller agents having empirically-parameterized incomes and
homogenous preferences for amenities, realtors update price expectations based on the recent sales; Exp4 assumes buyer and seller agents having empirically-parameterized incomes and
heterogeneous preferences for amenities, realtors do not update price expectations based on the recent sales; andﬁnally Exp5 assumes buyer and seller agents having empirically-param-
eterized incomes and heterogeneous preferences for amenities, realtors update price expectations based on the recent sales.
407T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

the resulting spatial patterns and economic metrics (Huang, Parker, Sun
et al., 2013; Sun et al., 2014)a sw e l la sf o rt h eo v e r a l le fﬁciency of a mar-
ket (Heckbert, 2011). In RHEA heterogeneity in both budgets and pref-
erences for amenity signiﬁcantly affects utility of an average household
who settled in the city. Speciﬁcally, in Exp1– homogeneous preferences
and budgets – average utility remains almost stable throughout a simu-
lation (Fig. 7). As soon as empirical distribution of incomes in Exp2 and
Exp3 is introduced the average utility starts growing over time. This
happens because heterogeneity in budgets allows the market to sort
agents across parcels with a distribution of prices in a way that maxi-
mizes their utility. Thus, budget heterogeneity is essential when model-
ing markets of heterogeneous goods with high price variability. Exp4
and Exp5 add preference heterogeneity on top of budget heterogeneity.
As a result average utility in the city grows for another 15% due to the
fact that traders with heterogeneous preferences are able to ﬁnd a bet-
ter match for their needs on a market. Activation of adaptive vs. static
price expectations does not have a signiﬁcant impact on average utility
of settled households agents (compare Exp2 to Exp3 or Exp4 to Exp5 in
Fig. 7).
3.4. Observation on micro-foundations #3: static vs. adaptive price
expectations
RHEA implements a process of price expectations formation either
as an adaptive (Exp3 and 5) or as a static one (Exp1, 2 and 4). When
adaptive price expectation is activated a real estate agent monthly up-
dates his hedonic function using R-extension based on the recent trans-
actions. Table 7 presents the coefﬁcients of a hedonic function changing
over time for selected time steps.
The effect of these changes may be best seen visually inFig. 8, which
applies the static and adaptive hedonic model to an average house in the
city. It is quite obvious that under adaptive expectations with an inten-
sive trading the price of an average house is quite volatile.
Price dynamics for the four groups of properties inFig. 5 also demon-
s t r a t e st h a tah o u s i n gm a r k e tw i t hn op r i c eu p d a t e ,i . e .‘static’,h a sav e r y
smooth price trend. At the same time a market with adaptive price ex-
pectations, which updates over time based on the recent transaction
and preferences and incomes of newcomers, is quite corrugated. The
level of ‘bumpiness’ depends on the interactions between landscape
heterogeneity and micro-foundation of agent behavior. Speciﬁcally, in
Fig. 5a and b the growth of the price trend under the adaptive realtor
strategy (Exp3 and 5) is larger in the extent and is quite jagged com-
pared to the small gradual increase in prices in markets with static real-
t o rb e h a v i o r( E x p 1 ,2a n d4 ) .Fig. 5d shows that it is the extent and the
speed of price increase that is higher in the adaptive price expectations
markets (Exp3 and 5) in comparison with static ones (Exp1, 2 and 4).
Thus, prices in highly demanded areas, e.g. waterfront here, experience
an ampliﬁcation effect if adaptive price expectation is activated. It im-
plies that an assumption that base prices remain the same over time,
i.e. realtors do not update their price information, is sufﬁcient for model-
ing gradual change processes in housing markets. Impacts of abrupt
Table 7
Dynamics in the coefﬁcients of the hedonic price function (Eq. (8)).
Exp1, 2 and 4 throughout the simulation; Exp3 and 5 in time = 0 Exp3 Exp5
Time = 12 Time = 24 Time = 12 Time = 24
time 0 12 24 12 24
intercept 11.337 11.304 11.659 11.403 11.748
bathrooms 0.108 0.140 0.135 0.106 0.161
bathrooms2 −0.011 −0.015 −0.003 −0.002 −0.002
age −0.01 −0.008 −0.007 −0.011 −0.008
age2 0.000094 −4.54E−06 −1.30E−06 1.22E −05 1.11E −06
SQFT 0.001 9.60E −04 9.64E −04 9.55E −04 8.56E −04
SQFT2 −0.00011 −1.30E−08 −4.00E−09 −2.50E−08 −1.10E−08
lotsize 0.03 0.037 0.064 0.037 0.091
lotsize2 0.00019 −4.23E−05 −4.43E−04 0.000058266 −8.18E−04
newhome −0.059 −0.056 −0.054 −0.045 −0.041
postFirm −0.022 −0.001 −0.006 −0.082 −0.058
FP100 −0.078 −0.058 −0.051 −0.062 −0.065
FP500 −0.062 −0.049 −0.044 −0.056 −0.059
coastalFront 0.314 0.372 0.378 0.354 0.377
log(distAmen) −0.106 −0.101 −0.116 −0.115 −0.125
log(distCBD) −0.00038 −0.015 −0.090 −0.022 −0.090
log(distHwy) 0.005 −0.002 0.007 0.001 0.004
log(distPark) −0.001 0.001 0.035 0.021 0.044
Fig. 7. Dynamics of the average utility of settled household agents in the city over time.
Fig. 6. The percent of successful trades (trade codes TC1, TC2, TC3 and TC5, seeTable 4)i n
the total number of trade attempts over time.
408 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

changes in markets and effects of social ampli ﬁcation, e.g. realized
through market competition for highly demanded areas and re ﬂected
in prices trends, are evident when adaptive price expectations are
present.
The aggregated effect of this dynamics is also well re ﬂected in the
trend of the total property value in the city ( Fig. 9 ). The trend of the
total property value in the city is bumpy in adaptive price markets
(Exp3 and 5) and is smooth in static price markets (Exp1, 2 and 4). Ac-
cumulative effect of the adaptive vs. static price expectations is a distinct
increase in property values over time, and thus an increase in a tax base
for local governments as well as increase in direct expected damage if a
ﬂood disaster hits.
4. Conclusions
This paper provides a detailed ODD + D description of a spatially-
explicit empirical housing market ABM – RHEA and demonstrates its
performance under various micro-foundations. RHEA is well grounded
in economic theory and uses readily-available spatial data and econom-
ic empirical analysis. It moves beyond existing work by making a step
forward toward empirical modeling of ACE land markets by using actual
hedonic studies and real distribution of households incomes, while
explicitly simulating the emergence of urban property prices and their
spatial distribution under adaptive price expectations of heterogeneous
agents. The use of empirical data to parameterize micro behavior and
validate macro patterns in ABMs is widely discussed ( Heckbert,
Baynes et al., 2010; Heckbert & Bishop, 2011; Robinson et al., 2007;
Smajgl et al., 2011; Windrum et al., 2007 ). It is a challenge to employ
empirical data while still grounding an ABM in a particular theory.
Usually a modeler faces a trade-off between designing a theoretically-
grounded model with no empirical data employed and a comprehen-
sive empirical model but with ad hoc assumptions ( Boero &
Squazzoni, 2005). It is particularly difﬁcult to keep empirical ABMs con-
nected to a certain disciplinary theory, as one of the main reasons for
using an ABM is to depart from certain stylized assumptions in a ﬁeld.
RHEA makes a step forward by marrying theoretically-grounded
micro-foundations with standard empirical data.
The RHEA results demonstrate that this combination of theoretically
sound micro-foundations in agents’ behavior and empirical data is fea-
sible and opens opportunities to explore various methodological and
policy-relevant research questions. In particular, RHEA allows explora-
tion of gradual as well as abrupt changes in spatial economic systems
enabling possibilities to trace non-marginal abrupt shifts in housing
market dynamics in hazard-prone areas when either changes in the en-
vironment or in agents’ behavior occur. This is especially relevant for de-
signing policies in the world with climate change where sudden non-
marginal changes in economic system are expected. Existing decision-
support tools are designed to tackle marginal changes only and may
be misleading if economic systems undergo structural changes. The
methodological setup of RHEA is not limited only to urban models. It
can be extended to other challenges faced by decision-makers designing
policies to manage coupled socio-environmental systems and by re-
searchers modeling those.
Another advantage of RHEA is that while using empirical data, it
maintains the ﬂexibility of replacing it with stylized data if the former
is missing. Moreover, RHEA does not rely entirely on historic data,
which in fact represent only a snapshot of past choices in a land market,
but is able to adjust with time. This functionality is enabled through in-
corporating adaptive expectations about land market dynamics into the
spatial landscape. At the same time RHEA is programmed in open-
access Netlogo software, a user-friendly and easy-to-learn ABM envi-
ronment, which opens RHEA to a broad user community. The Netlogo
code of RHEA empowered by the use of GIS and R-extensions facilitates
real policy decision support. In summary, while many ABMs remain
stylized and focus on exploration of methodological questions, RHEA
deeply integrates micro-economic foundations with real data and stan-
dard empirical economic analysis. Thus, it represents an important
modern trend in the ABM ﬁeld: moving from stylized modeling experi-
ments to simulating real life situations using data to their full extent.
Yet, the downside of this process is that by trying to match reality
one makes a model increasingly more complex. This is known as
Bonini’s Paradox (Voinov, 2008): as a simulation model moves toward
representing the complexity of a real system, it forgoes its comprehen-
sibility and transparency. Thus, while the realism of a spatial ABM in-
creases the complexity of micro-foundations in agents ’ behavior may
need to be reduced. Robinson et al. (2007) also highlight that the
ABMs using GIS data should be simple. This may perhaps imply that
the use of state-of-the-art methodological advances in ABM and ACE,
e.g. advanced artiﬁcial learning techniques, is challenging outside of a
simpliﬁed context. In any case, RHEA is still data-intensive compared
to stylized ABMs of spatial economic systems and may take time to cal-
ibrate to a new case study. Another limitation of thisﬁrst presentation of
the RHEA model is that a thorough validation and a comprehensive sen-
sitivity analysis is still a subject of future work. A basic sensitivity anal-
ysis and comparative statics analysis is presented in Appendix A .
Systematic sensitivity analysis of certain micro-foundations of agents
and markets behavior is a vital aspect, which requires intensive simula-
tion runs and development of techniques to manage big simulation-
output data varying in time and space.8
The development of the RHEA model is theﬁrst stage of a multi-year
project. While some limitations exist, often relevant for any type of
Fig. 9. Dynamics of total property value (in % from the value at initialization) in the coastal
city under various micro-foundations of agent behavior (Exp1–5i n Table 6).
8 The processing of big data from social science ABMs is a vital research frontier and is a
subject of future work, for example within the MIRACLE project funded by the‘Digging In-
to Data’ program http://wici.ca/new/research/digging-into-data-did-research/.
Fig. 8. Price of an average house in the town over time under static (Exp1, 2 and 4) and
adaptive (Exp3 and Exp5) price expectations (in 2004 $). The regression function
(Eq. (8)) with the current regression coefﬁcients (Table 7) was applied to a house with av-
erage characteristics (Table 5).
409T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

modeling, RHEA offers much potential. Future work can develop in sev-
eral directions. Firstly, a detailed sensitivity analysis is to be performed,
and in particular mutual effects of combining two parts of price expec-
tation formation (Section2.3.3) are to be studied systematically. More-
over, one needs to asses the realism of produced price patterns: while
almost stable price trends in Exp1, 2 and 4 are hardly realistic, the
abruptness of the corrugated dynamics of prices in Exp3 and 5 may
also be exaggerated. Whether these market ﬂuctuations are temporary
or persistent can be important for interpretations and further applica-
tions of the model. The oscillations in price dynamics largely depend
on the speed of information update, i.e. the intensity of monthly trades.
Thus, sensitivity to the rates of buyers and sellers inﬂow, their trade in-
tensity and the time-horizon of realtors should be studied. Secondly,
agents, which are designed to make decisions under uncertainty follow-
ing expected utility approach, can be compared with agents operating
according to the prospect theory paradigm ( Kahneman & Tversky,
1979). Thirdly, an introduction of individual risk perception evolution
based on the theories of opinion dynamics ( Acemoglu & Ozdaglar,
2011) in addition to adaptive price learning dynamics is of great inter-
est. While majority of economic models assume static preferences and
risk perceptions, agents do in fact learn to adjust their perceptions and
preferences individually and through peer-to-peer networks ( Janssen
&J a g e r ,2 0 0 1), and potentially make different choices. It has been dem-
onstrated that alteration in agents’ preferences may signiﬁcantly change
emergent outcomes of an ABM ( Heckbert, Adamowicz et al., 2010 ).
Lastly, a design and conduct of parallel experiments with human sub-
jects in the lab and RHEA is planned. Lab experiments could be used
to acquire behavioral foundations about risk perception dynamics in a
group (Contini, Leombruni, & Richiardi, 2007), also when hazard prob-
abilities change. ABM will help to extend these behavioral patterns to
larger (than in the lab) temporal and spatial scales ( Duffy, 2006;
Heckbert, Baynes et al., 2010; Janssen, Holahan, Lee, & Ostrom, 2010;
Poggio et al., 1999) and to validate agents’ decision-making in a spatial
landscape (Evans, Sun, & Kelley, 2006; Heckbert & Bishop, 2011 ). The
work in these directions will increase the reliability of the RHEA
model and improve its utility in supporting policy-making.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the Netherlands Organisation for Sci-
entiﬁc Research (NWO) VENI Grant 451-11-033, the U.S. National Sci-
ence Foundation ’s Coupled Natural and Human Systems program
‘‘SLUCE II project (Spatial Land Use Change and Ecological Effects) NSF
CNH-0813799, and the EU-FP7-308601 COMPLEX project. The author
is grateful to Prof. O. Bin, Prof. A. Voinov, Dr. B. Naimi, L. Vidgop-Barg,
Prof. S. Hulscher and to the discussions within the Laboratory for Social
Interactions and Economic Behavior at the University of Twente. Lastly,
the author also thanks the editor and the three anonymous reviewers
for the valuable comments and suggestions.
Appendix A. Basic sensitivity analysis
Experiments 1–5( Table 6) in fact present a sensitivity analysis of the
model’s emergent outcomes in terms of utilities, prices and their spatial
distributions, on micro-foundations. This series of ﬁve experiments
starts with a stylized case and moves toward more empirical represen-
tation of agents’ behavior. Experiment 1 is a stylized base case scenario
when neither budgets nor preferences of households’ agents vary, and
when expectations of future housing prices are not updated. Experi-
ment 5 employs empirical distribution of households’ budgets, assumes
that preferences for amenities are normally distributed, and allows real-
tors to update price expectations based on recent sales. Yet, there are
still several parameters, which have an impact on the emergent macro
outcomes.
In what follows, we perform an additional sensitivity analysis of the
model’s macro-outcomes to several main micro-foundations. A
comprehensive sensitivity analysis of the model performance, analysis
and visualization of the ‘big data ’ that it generates is currently under
way.9 Here we employ the comparative static analysis of agents’ utility,
link these trends to the impact on prices, and complement it with the
examples of the model performance. We would like to highlight once
again that households in RHEA make their purchasing decisions in a
housing market in two stages: (1) they ﬁrst select which house they
like based on highest utility among considered houses, (2) then they de-
cide what bid price to offer using seller’s ask price as an anchor. Such a
market design allows combining theoretically-grounded behavioral
rules (i.e. resuming the standard setup of urban economics models in
our case) with conventional empirical data (e.g. econometric hedonic
model) to parameterize micro-foundations of agents ’ behavior while
preserving agents and landscape heterogeneity. Yet, it also implies,
that there is no formal link in equations between agents preferences,
budgets and eventual transaction prices as it is replaced by logical ex-
pressions (i.e. if-else conditions) and ﬁlters (e.g. choosing minimum
and maximum) in the program code. Given the architecture of this mar-
ket, there is a direct link between agents’ preferences and budgets and
their utilities. The impact on prices is consistently related to changes
in utility: the houses that are most desirable receive more bids (both
below and above ask price), and have a higher probability to be sold
above initial ask prices as sellers have an opportunity to choose the
highest bid.
To derive qualitative predictions of how macro indicators of interest
change with some exogenous parameters change, we performed“com-
parative statics” analysis by estimatingﬁrst-order derivatives10 of corre-
sponding equations with respect to a certain parameter, while holding
others constant.
A.1. Sensitivity to the years of mortgage
Coefﬁcient kH translates the property price ( Htran) into an annual
payment in Eqs. (1) and (2). Experiments in this paper make a simplify-
ing assumption that mortgage is paid out in m = 15 years (i.e. kH =1 /
15). If mortgage can be arranged for a longer/shorter period then it
changes Dneg of traders and their utility:
∂Dneg
∂m ¼/C0 Htranð1 þ NUSTrÞ
12m2 b0 ðA:1Þ
If years of mortgage grow, i.e. kH decreases, then Dneg of sellers de-
creases. This implies that opportunity costs of waiting another month
are smaller and sellers can afford to wait longer for a better deal on a
market. In other words they are more likely to reject option 4 in price
negotiations ( Fig. 3 ). Overall it means less successful trades in one
time step or slower dynamics of a market, which in turn affects price ex-
pectations update. The direction, in which the latter changes, depends
on several other factors: preferences of the incoming new buyers on a
market, whether realtors extend the period of transaction analysis for
more months, the types of properties that were sold recently and etc.
Dneg of buyers is a monthly update of an average mortgage. Thus, if
years of mortgage increase, i.e. kH decreases, then Dneg of buyers also
decreases. It implies that it costs less for buyers to wait resulting in
less successful trades per trade period.
∂U
∂m ¼ sα /C1 Aγ /C1 Hask /C1ð Y /C0 TðDÞ/C0 Hask
m Þ
/C0 α
m2 > 0 ðA:2Þ
9 Please see details on the transnational Digging into Data MIRACLE projecthttp://wici.
ca/new/research/digging-into-data-did-research/.
10 All derivatives were estimated using https://www.wolframalpha.com. The negative
sign of a derivative implies that a macro variable declines with an increase in one unit of
a parameter; the positive sign implies that a macro variable increases as a parameter
grows.
410 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

If mortgage is given for longer period, i.e. years of mortgagem grows,
then utility U grows because households either spend less on the same
housing annually and have more disposable budget for a composite
good, or can afford buying a more expensive house with bigger sq. foot-
age or land lot or richer environmental amenities.
We run RHEA with kH = 1/7 and kH = 30 in addition to the base
case of kH = 1/15 reported in the paper. We report the sensitivity of
Dneg and U for experiments 1 and 5 as they present two extreme
cases in terms of other settings ( Table A.1). Changes are indeed in the
direction predicted by Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2).
A.2. Sensitivity to travel costs
Currently travel costs per unit of distance are taken from another
study ( Wu and Plantinga, 2003 ), which provides an estimate of the
real travel costs an average US household spends per year ($1500 per
mile per year or $0.284 per foot per year). As travel costs per unit of dis-
tance may change, we ﬁnd the ﬁrst derivate of utility:
∂U
∂T ¼/C0 sα /C1 Aγ /C1ð 1 /C0 αÞ/C1 D /C1ð Y /C0 TðDÞ/C0 kH HaskÞ/C0 α b0 ðA:3Þ
Eq. (A.3) implies that utility increases with the decrease of travel
costs and falls if they grow. It is logical since there is less money avail-
able for either a composite good consumption or an improvement in liv-
ing conditions (i.e. richer amenities or bigger sq. footage of a house and
land lot). The impact on housing prices is expected to be mixed: the
more distant parcels become less affordable, while price for housing
closer to CBD increases since demand for these properties grows.
RHEA was run for two additional scenarios: with travel costs twice
lower and twice higher. As expected, utility becomes lower in the case
of increased travel costs, and higher in the case of lower travel costs
both in Exp1 and Exp5 ( Table A.2 ). The overall effect on prices is
mixed in Exp1. In Exp5 total property value in the town grows most
likely because higher-income households outbid others for the most
central locations driving prices up. The effect is ampli ﬁed by adaptive
price expectations, which include this trend in further setting of ask
prices.
A.3. Sensitivity to the deviation of bid prices from ask prices (h)
Variable h in Eqs. (6) and (7) determines the upper boundary of the
deviation of a submitted bid price from a stated ask price, i.e. how dis-
persed will bid prices be. The sign of the derivative is straightforward:
∂Hbid
∂h ¼ 1; if h > 0
/C0 1 if h b0
/C26
ðA:4Þ
Since h is a random number between 0% and 10% of the ask price of a
seller, the fact whether resulting bid price increases or decreases with a
change of h on one unit actually depends on a random seed. The ques-
tion is whether other market mechanisms, such as competition and
price update eventually drive price down or up. The simulation results
Table A.2
Percentage difference in total property value in the modeled town and in the average utility of settle households (U) in case travel costs change from $0.142 to $0.284 to $0.568 per foot per
year. Coefﬁcient T = 0.284 is taken as the base case.
Exp1 Exp5
T = 0.284/2 T = 0.284 T = 0.284 * 2 T = 0.284/2 T = 0.284 T = 0.284 * 2
Total property value in town 99.6 100.0 99.4 98.9 100.0 106.1
Average utility of settled households 107.2 100.0 84.7 107.6 100.0 92.6
Table A.3
Percentage difference in total property value in the modeled town and in average rent buyers pay (buyers’ Dneg) in case deviation of bid price from ask price changes from 3% to 5% to 10%.
Coefﬁcient h = 5% is taken as the base case.
Exp1 Exp5
h = 0.03 h = 0.05 h = 0.1 h = 0.03 h = 0.05 h = 0.1
Total property value in town 99.6 100.0 99.9 99.8 100.0 165.7
Average rent ( Dneg of buyers) 99.6 100.0 99.9 99.8 100.0 165.7
Table A.1
Percentage difference in buyers’ opportunity costs of waiting for another trade attempt in the next time step ( Dneg) and in the average utility of settle households ( U)i nc a s ey e a r so f
mortgage change from 7 to 15 to 30 years. Coefﬁcient kH = 1/15 (i.e. years of mortgage m = 15) is taken as the base case.
Exp1 Exp5
kH =
1/7
kH =
1/15
kH =
1/30
kH =
1/7
kH =
1/15
kH =
1/30
Dneg of buyers 148.9 100.0 74.9 140.2 100.0 76.4
Average utility of settled households 86.6 100.0 107.2 94.2 100.0 106.0
Table A.4
Percentage difference in the average utility of the settled households (U) in case standard deviation from the average preference for environmental amenities changes from 0.01 to 0.05 to
0.1. Coefﬁcient g = 0.05 is taken as the base case.
Exp4 Exp5
g =
0.01
g =
0.05
g =
0.1
g =
0.01
g =
0.05
g =
0.1
Average utility of settled households 87.7 100.0 161.6 87.8 100.0 159.6
411T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

presented in this paper useh = 0.05. We run additional scenarios withh
= 0.03 and h =0 . 1(Table A.3).
In case of Exp1 where agents are homogeneous and there are no
adaptive price expectations occurring, there is hardly a difference in
the resulting transaction prices and total value of all residential proper-
ties in the town, conﬁrming the mixed effects anticipated from Eq. (A.4).
However, as soon as there are agents with higher budgets and realtors
adapt price expectations based on the recent demand and supply,
there is a signiﬁcant growth in prices as bid prices start to be more dis-
persed (Table A.3). There are two processes contributing to this growth.
Firstly, as incomes are heterogeneous there exist high-income buyers
who are able to afford a bid price up to 10% higher than an ask price
of a seller, which may simply not be affordable in case of homogenous
incomes. It results in more successful transaction with bid prices up to
10% higher that ask prices. Secondly, as realtors update their price ex-
pectations, they do account for these growing prices. Thus, overall mar-
ket dynamics responds to the growing demand, which sellers now also
take into account when setting their ask prices. This leads to the ampli-
ﬁcation of price increase leading up to 66% increase in cases when bid
price may deviate up to 10% from the anchor ask price.
A.4. Sensitivity to the distribution of preferences for amenities (γ)
The value of average preferences for environmental amenities γ =
0.5 is based on another study ( Wu and Plantinga, 2003 ) and assumed
to be normally distributed. Yet, the standard deviation of this distribu-
tion is not known but is likely to affect macro outcomes, such as utility.
Assuming thata is the average of households’ preferencesγ and g is the
standard deviation, we estimate the ﬁrst derivative of utility on g:
∂U
∂g ¼ sα /C1ð Y /C0 TðDÞ/C0 kH HaskÞ1/C0 α /C1 logðAÞ/C1 Aavþg > 0
/C0 sα /C1ð Y /C0 TðDÞ/C0 kH HaskÞ1/C0 α /C1 logðAÞ/C1 Aav/C0 g b0
(
ðA:5Þ
With a more dispersed distribution of gamma, there will be more
polarized society in terms of preferences for amenity. Generally speak-
ing, the impact of distribution of preferences for amenity on utility of
searching households is likely to be mutually cancelled (A.5). However,
the distribution may have an impact on the utility of eventually settled
households in the city. Speci ﬁcally, households with higher + g (and
lower −g), i.e. higher preferences for amenity γ, would always prefer
properties with higher amenity levels. The effect is opposite for house-
holds with lower +g or higher −g. Thus, amenity-lovers would always
bid for high-amenity properties. However, whether they are able to
compete for and get them or not depends on their budgets. In case of
heterogeneous budgets RHEA assigns distributions of budgets and pref-
erences independently, assuming that high-income and low-income
people are in general may like or be indifferent to environmental ame-
nities with an equal probability. Thus, whether prices go up or down de-
pend also on the incomes of households bidding for properties with
heterogeneous levels of coastal amenities.
The simulation results on the differences in the levels of utility under
various scenarios of γ distribution for Exp4 and Exp5 are presented in
Table A.4 . The more dispersed the distribution of preferences among
households who eventually settled in the town, the higher the utility.
It occurs because differences in the levels of amenities start to matter
more: the same attribute ( A, coastal amenity) contributes more to a
household’s utility and households with more polarized preferences
can ﬁnd a better match among heterogeneous properties on a market.
Moreover, there is market sorting happening. Speci ﬁcally, households
that like amenities and can afford them, buy coastal properties. House-
holds who value them less, prefer properties with fewer amenities and
either settle with cheaper houses gaining more utility from a composite
good or go for larger housing without amenities.
References
Acemoglu, D., & Ozdaglar, A. (2011). Opinion dynamics and learning in social networks.
Dynamic Games and Applications, 1(1), 3–49.
Alonso, W. (1964). Location and land use. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
An, L. (2012). Modeling human decisions in coupled human and natural systems: Review
of agent-based models. Ecological Modelling, 229,2 5–36.
Arthur, W. B., Durlauf, S. N., & Lane, D. (1997). The economy as an evolving complex system
II. Santa Fe institute studies in the science of complexity , Vol. XXVII, Addison-Wesley.
Balmann, A., & Happe, K. (2000). Applying parallel genetic algorithms to economic prob-
lems: The case of agricultural land markets. In“Microbehavior and Macroresults”,I I F E T
2000 Proceedings. Corvallis, Oregon USA.
B e n e n s o n ,I .( 1 9 9 8 ) .Multi-agent simulations of residential dynamics in the city.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 22(1), 25–42.
Bin, O., Kruse, J. B., & Landry, C. E. (2008). Flood hazards, insurance rates, and amenities:
Evidence from the coastal housing market. The Journal of Risk and Insurance , 75(1),
63–82.
Boero, R., & Squazzoni, F. (2005). Does empirical embeddedness matter? Methodological
issues on agent-based models for analytical social science.Jasss-the Journal of Artiﬁcial
Societies and Social Simulation, 8(4).
Brown, D. G., & Robinson, D. T. (2006). Effects of heterogeneity in residential preferences
on an agent-based model of urban sprawl. Ecology and Society, 11(1) art.46.
Brown, D. G., Robinson, D. T., An, L., Nassauer, J. I., Zellner, M., Rand, W., et al. (2008). Ex-
urbia from the bottom-up: Modeling multiple actors and their landscape interactions.
Geoforum, 39(2), 805–818.
Contini, B., Leombruni, R., & Richiardi, M. (2007). Exploring a new ExpAce: The comple-
mentarities between experimental economics and agent-based computational eco-
nomics. Journal of Social Complexity, 3(1), 13–22.
Dawson, R. J., Peppe, R., & Wang, M. (2011). An agent-based model for risk-based ﬂood
incident management. Natural Hazards, 59,1 6 7–189.
Duffy, J. (2006). Agent-based models and human subject experiments. In L. Tesfatsion, &
K. L. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of computational economics volume 2: Agent-based compu-
tational economics (pp. 949–1011). Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.
Ettema, D. (2011).A multi-agent model of urban processes: Modelling relocation process-
es and price setting in housing markets. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
35,1 –11.
Ettema, D. F., Arentze, T. A., & Timmermans, H. J. P. (2011).Social inﬂuences on household
location, mobility and activity choice in integrated micro-simulation models.
Transportation Research. Part A: Policy and Practice, 45(4), 283–295.
Evans, T. P., Sun, W. J., & Kelley, H. (2006). Spatially explicit experiments for the explora-
tion of land-use decision-making dynamics. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 20(9), 1013–1037.
Filatova, T., & Bin, O. (2013). Changing climate, changing behavior: Adaptive economic
behavior and housing markets responses to ﬂood risks. In B. Kaminski, & G. Koloch
(Eds.), Advances in social simulation, Vol. 229.( p p .2 4 9–259). Berlin: Springer.
Filatova, T., Parker, D., & van der Veen, A. (2009). Agent-based urban land markets:
Agent’s pricing behavior, land prices and urban land use change. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Societies and Social Simulation, 12(1), 3.
F i l a t o v a ,T . ,P a r k e r ,D .C . ,&v a nd e rV e e n ,A .( 2 0 1 1 ) .The implications of skewed risk
perception for a dutch coastal land marke t: Insights from an agent-based com-
putational economics model. Agricultural and Resource Economics Review ,
40(3), 405 –423.
Filatova, T., van der Veen, A., & Parker, D. (2009). Land market interactions between het-
erogeneous agents in a heterogeneous landscape—tracing the macro-scale effects of
individual trade-offs between environmental amenities and disamenities. Canadian
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 57(4), 431–459.
Filatova, T., Verburg, P. H., Parker, D. C., & Stannard, C. A. (2013). Spatial agent-based
models for socio-ecological systems: Challenges and prospects. Environmental
Modelling & Software, 45,1 –7.
Frame, D. E. (1998). Housing, natural hazards, and insurance.Journal of Urban Economics,
44(1), 93–109.
Geoghegan, J., Wainger, L. A., & Bockstael, N. E. (1997). Spatial landscape indices in a he-
donic framework: An ecological economics analysis using GIS. Ecological economics,
23,2 5 1–264.
Gilbert, N., Hawksworth, J. C., & Swinney, P. A. (2009). An agent-based model of the En-
glish housing market. In Association for the advancement of artiﬁcial intelligence spring
symposium series. Stanford, California: The AAAI Press, Menlo Park, California, March
23–25, 2009.
Grimm, V., Berger, U., DeAngelis, D. L., Polhill, J. G., Giske, J., & Railsback, S. F. (2010). The
ODD protocol a review and ﬁrst update. Ecological Modelling, 221(23), 2760–2768.
Heckbert, S., & Smajgl, A. (2005). Analysing urban systems using agent-based modelling.
In MODSIM 2005 international congress on modelling and simulation“advances and ap-
plications for management and decision making”. Modelling and Simulation Society of
Australia and New Zealand.
Heckbert, S. (2011).Agent-based modelling of emissions trading for coastal landscapes in
transition. Journal of Land Use Science, 6(2–3), 137–150.
Heckbert, S., Adamowicz, W., Boxall, P., & Hanneman, D. (2010). Cumulative effects and
emergent properties of multiple-use natural resources. Multi-Agent-Based
Simulation X, 5683,1 –13.
Heckbert, S., & Bishop, I. (2011). Empirical calibration of spatially explicit agent-based
models. In D. Marceau, & I. Benenson (Eds.), Advanced Geosimulation (pp. 92–110).
Bentham.
Heckbert, S., Baynes, T., & Reeson, A. (2010).Agent-based modeling in ecological econom-
ics. Ecological Economics Reviews, 1185,3 9–53.
Huang, Q., Parker, D. C., Filatova, T., & Sun, S. (2013). A review of urban residential choice
models using agent-based modeling. Environment and Planning: B, 40.
412 T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413

Huang, Q., Parker, D. C., Sun, S., & Filatova, T. (2013). Effects of agent heterogeneity in the
presence of a land-market: A systematic test in an agent-based laboratory.Computers
Environment and Urban Systems, 41,1 8 8–203.
Irwin, E. G., & Bockstael, N. E. (2002). Interacting agents, spatial externalities and the evo-
lution of residential land use patterns. Journal of Economic Geography, 2,3 1–54.
Janssen, M. A., Holahan, R., Lee, A., & Ostrom, E. (2010). Lab experiments for the study of
social-ecological systems.Science, 328(5978), 613–617.
Janssen, M. A., & Jager, W. (2001). Fashions, habits and changing preferences: Simulation
of psychological factors affecting market dynamics. Journal of Economic Psychology ,
22(6), 745–772.
Janssen, M. A., & Ostrom, E. (2006). Empirically based, agent-based models. Ecology and
Society, 11(2).
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk.
Econometrica, 47(2), 263–292.
Kirman, A. P., & Vriend, N. J. (2001).Evolving market structure: An ACE model of price dis-
persion and loyalty. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 25,4 5 9–502.
LeBaron, B. (2006). Agent-based computational ﬁnance. In L. Tesfatsion, & K. L. Judd
(Eds.), Handbook of computational economics volume 2: Agent-based computational
economics (pp. 1187–1233). Elsevier B.V.
Magliocca, N., Saﬁrova, E., McConnell, V., & Walls, M. (2011). An economic agent-based
model of coupled housing and land markets (CHALMS). Computers Environment and
Urban Systems, 35(3), 183–191.
Matthews, R. B., Gilbert, N. G., Roach, A., Polhill, J. G., & Gotts, N. M. (2007). Agent-based
land-use models: A review of applications. Landscape Ecology, 22,1 4 4 7–1459.
Miller, E., Hunt, J. D., Abraham, J. E., & Salvini, P. A. (2004).Microsimulating urban systems.
Computers, Environment, and Urban Systems, 28,9 –44.
Mueller, B., Bohn, F., Dreßler, G., Groeneveld, J. r., Klassert, C., Martin, R., et al. (2013).De-
scribing human decisions in agent-based models − ODD + D an extension of the
ODD protocol. Environmental Modelling & Software, 48(37–48).
Parker, D. C., Berger, T., & Manson, S. M. (Eds.). (2002).Agent-based models of land-use and
land-cover change: Report and review of an international workshop.LUCC Report Series
Bloomington, LUCC, October 4–7, 2001.
Parker, D. C., Brown, D. G. Filatova, T., Riolo, R., Robinson, D. T., Sun, S. (2011). Do land
markets matter? A modeling ontology and experimental design to test the effects
of land markets for an agent-based model of ex-urban residential land-use change.
In A. J. Heppenstall, A. T. Crooks, L. M. See, & M. Batty (Eds.), Agent-based models of
geographical systems (pp. 525–542). Dordrecht: Springer. bhttp://www.casa.ucl.ac.
uk/ABM.pdf> (accessed 06.01.14).
Parker, D. C., & Filatova, T. (2008). A conceptual design for a bilateral agent-based land
market with heterogeneous economic agents. Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 32(6), 454–463.
Plantinga, A. J., & Lewis, D. J. (2014).Landscape simulations with econometric-based land-
use models. In J. Wu, & J. M. Duke (Eds.), Oxford handbook of land economics.O x f o r d
University Press.
Poggio, T., Lo, A. W., LeBaron, B., & Chan, N. T. (1999).Agent-based models ofﬁnancial mar-
kets: A comparison with experimental markets. MIT Working Paper.
Polhill, G., Dawson, T., Parker, D. C., Jin, X., Robinson, K., Filatova, T., et al. (2014). Towards
metadata standards for sharing simulation outputs. In Social simulation conference
(ESSA 2014).B a r c e l o n a ,S p a i n( 4 p ) .
Robinson, D. T., Brown, D., Parker, D. C., Schreinemachers, P., Janssen, M. A., Huigen, M.,
et al. (2007). Comparison of empirical methods for building agent-based models in
land use science. Journal of Land Use Science, 2(1), 31–55.
Rosen, S. (1974). Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure
competition. Journal of Political Economy, 82(1), 34–55.
Schreinemachers, P., & Berger, T. (2011).An agent-based simulation model of human en-
vironment interactions in agricultural systems. Environmental Modelling & Software,
26,8 4 5–859.
Sheppard, S. (1999). Hedonic analysis of housing markets. In E. S. Mills, & P. Cheshire
(Eds.), Handbook of regional and urban economics (pp. 1596–1635). Elsevier Science
B.V.
Simon, H. (1997). Models of bounded rationality. Emperically grounded economic reason,
Vol. 3, MIT Press.
Smajgl, A., Brown, D. G., Valbuena, D., & Huigen, M. G. A. (2011). Empirical characterisa-
tion of agent behaviours in socio-ecological systems. Environmental Modelling &
Software, 26(7), 837–844.
Stern, N. (2008).The economics of climate change: The stern review.Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sun, S., Parker, D. C., Huang, Q., Filatova, T., Robinson, D. T., Riolo, R. L., et al. (2014).Market
impacts on land-use change: An agent-based experiment.Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 104(3), 460–484.
Tesfatsion, L., & Judd, K. L. (2006). Handbook of computational economics volume II: agent-
based computational economics.Elsevier B.V.
Tesfatsion, L. (2006). Agent-based computational economics: A constructive approach to
economic theory. In L. Tesfatsion, & K. L. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of computational eco-
nomics volume 2: Agent-based computational economics (pp. 831–880). Amsterdam:
Elsevier B.V.
Thiele, J. C., & Grimm, V. (2010). NetLogo meets R: Linking agent-based models with a
toolbox for their analysis. Environmental Modelling & Software, 25(8), 972–974.
Valbuena, D., Verburg, P. H., & Bregt, A. K. (2008). Am e t h o dt od eﬁne a typology for
agent-based analysis in regional land-use research. Agriculture Ecosystems &
Environment, 128(1–2), 27–36.
van Delden, H., Luja, P., & Engelen, G. (2007). Integration of multi-scale dynamic spatial
models of socio-economic and physical processes for river basin management.
Environmental Modelling & Software, 22,2 2 3–238.
Verburg, P. H., de Koning, G. H. J., Kok, K., Veldkamp, A., & Bouma, J. (1999). A spatial ex-
plicit allocation procedure for modelling the pattern of land use change based upon
actual land use. Ecological Modelling, 116,4 5–61.
Voinov, A. (2008). Systems science and modeling for ecological economics. London – Bur-
lington – San Diego: Elsevier, Academic Print.
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo.Center for connected learning and computer-based modeling.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University.bhttp://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/>.
Windrum, P., Fagiolo, G., & Moneta, A. (2007). Empirical validation of agent-based
models: alternatives and prospects. Jasss-the Journal of Arti ﬁcial Societies and Social
Simulation, 10(2).
Wu, J. (2001). Environmental amenities and the spatial pattern of urban sprawl.American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 83(3), 691–697.
Wu, J. J. (2006). Environmental amenities, urban sprawl, and community characteristics.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 52(2), 527–547.
Wu, J., & Plantinga, A. J. (2003). The inﬂuence of public open space on urban spatial struc-
ture. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 46(2), 288–309.
Yin, L., & Muller, B. (2007). Residential location and the biophysical environment:
Excurban development agents in a heterogeneous landscape. Environment and
Planning B-Planning & Design, 34(2), 279–295.
413T. Filatova / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54 (2015) 397– 413
