Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ceus
Endogenous rise and collapse of housing price/H22845
An agent-based model of the housing market
Jiaqi Ge
The James Hutton Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen, UK
ARTICLE INFO
Article history:
Received 27 May 2015
Received in revised form 10 November 2016
Accepted 12 November 2016
Available online 6 December 2016
Keywords:
Agent-based model
Housing market
Housing bubble
Lenient lending
Speculation
ABSTRACT
Onthebasisofinterviewswithlocalrealestateagents,thisstudydevelopsanagent-basedmodelofhousing
market to determine the cause of rise and collapse of US housing price during the years immediately pre-
ceding the US ﬁnancial crisis (2007–2009). We study the key factors affecting housing price volatility, such
as lenient ﬁnancing and speculation. The dynamic simulation ﬁndings in the study show in concrete terms
how lenient lending practices combined with speculation can lead to increased volatility in housing price,
including sharp rises immediately followed by collapses. The exploratory work in this study will contribute
to the understanding of the causes of housing bubbles and inform policy decisions.
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The US housing bubble started in about 2000. Average housing
price almost doubled in just a few years before it immediately col-
lapsed at the end of 2006. The housing market crash triggered the
global ﬁnancial and economic crises, and eventually led to the dis-
appearance of approximately US $11 trillion in household wealth.
Similarly, when Japan’s housing bubble crashed in the early 1990s, it
caused tremendous loss and an economic slowdown that lasted for
many years. Housing bubbles have taken place all over the world, in
bothdevelopedcountries,suchasAustralia,France,Spain,Ireland,and
the UnitedKingdom (Fig. 1), and emerging economies,such as South
Korea,Russia,China,andIndia,causingeconomicturmoileverytime.
Kindleberger (1987)deﬁned a bubble as:
“A bubble is a sharp rise in asset price in a continuous process,
with the initial rise generating expectations of further rises and
attracting new buyers – generally speculators interested in proﬁt
from trading in the asset rather than its use or earning capacity.
Theriseisthenfollowedbyareversalofexpectationsandasharp
/H22845I would like to give special thanks to Prof. Leigh Tesfatsion at Iowa State Univer-
sity for her advice and support throughout the writing of the paper. I would like to
thank Prof. Steve Kautz at Iowa State University for his generous help. I would like
to thank Prof. Catherine Kling, Prof. Joseph Herrige and Prof. John Schroeter at Iowa
StateUniversityfortheircommentsandsuggestions.Finally,Iwouldliketothanktwo
anonymous reviewers for their helpful and constructive feedback.
decline in price, often resulting in severe ﬁnancial crisis in short,
the bubble bursts. ”
Thedeﬁnitioncapturesthetwodistinguishingcharacteristicsofa
bubble: (1) it features a continuous steep rise of asset price followed
by a sudden steep fall in asset price and (2) it involves speculation
behavior that causes a disconnection between change in asset price
during a bubble and change in fundamentals. The recent US housing
bubble ﬁts both characteristics.
The housing market differs from other commodity markets in
many ways. First, it is highly leveraged: most houses are purchased
with borrowed money. Property purchased with mortgage loans are
then used as the collateral for the loan, which creates a close link
between the housing and the ﬁnancial market. Second, properties
provide both services and investment values. A typical housing mar-
ket is made up of both investor and non-investor buyers. Third,
the housing market is a “thin market,” meaning the number of
transactions in a given period can be low, and buyers and sellers
often have to wait on the market to secure a deal. Moreover, they
often engage in negotiations and other strategic interactions (Merlo
& Ortalo-Magn, 2004). As a result, the initial listed price is rarely
the ﬁnal price. Finally, the housing market is made up of multi-
ple submarkets or neighborhoods, and price across neighborhoods
can vary enormously within the same metropolitan area (Goodman,
1978; Palm, 1978). Neighborhoods also interact with each other
through relocation of residents (Rosenthal, 2008), shared public
services (Glaeser, Kahn, & Rappaport, 2008) and environment (Ellen,
Schill, Susin, & Schwartz, 2002). These characteristics have made
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2016.11.005
0198-9715/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 183
Fig. 1. Housing bubble in selected countries.
Source: Graph source:Commission et al. (2011)
the housing market highlycomplex,whichmay renderconventional
approaches inadequate in dealing with it.
This study develops an agent-based model of the housing market
that is able to account for the aforementioned unique characteristics
and complex nature. In addition to the agents typical in an agent-
based housing model, such as households and developers, we also
include speculators and a lending agent, which enables us to study
the role of speculation and leverage in the rise of a housing bubble.
We attempt to answer the following research questions: can hous-
ing price rise and collapse endogenously without external shocks? If
so, what is the mechanism that causes the endogenous rise and col-
lapseofhousingprice?Weﬁndinthesimulationresultsthathousing
prices will rise and collapse endogenously without external shocks,
andthetwonecessaryconditionsfortheriseofahousingbubbleare
lenient lending and speculation.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews various
approachestothehousingmarketintheexistingliterature. Section3
describes the agent-based housing market model. Section 4 dis-
cusses treatment factors of the model and the experimental design.
Section 5shows the model results. Finally,Section 6concludes the
study.
2. Approaches to the housing market
In the economic literature, classic frameworks such as asset-
pricing theory, trade theory, hedonic price model, prospect theory,
life cycle model, and business cycle model have been applied to
the housing market. For example,Poterba (1984)applied an asset-
pricing model to derive equilibrium housing price based on rent
and maintenance cost.Stein (1995) used a trade model to explain
pricevolatilityandtradingvolumeinthehousingmarket. Can(1992)
reviewed various types of hedonic price models, which decompose
housing price as the sum of the values provided by the house’s var-
ious attributes.Genesove, Mayer, et al. (2001)used prospect theory
in behavioral economics to explain seller behavior in the hous-
ing market. Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2006)developed a life cycle
model with credit constraint for ﬁrst-time buyers to explain hous-
ing price volatility. Finally,Silos (2007) and Sommervoll, Borgersen,
and Wennemo (2010)developed business cycle models to study the
effect of wealth distribution, portfolio composition, heterogeneous
expectations, and other factors on the acquisition of housing.
More recently, equilibrium sorting models have been devel-
oped to study heterogeneous location preferences under market
equilibrium condition (Banzhaf & Walsh, 2008; Bayer, Ferreira, &
McMillan, 2007; Calabrese, Epple, Romer, & Sieg, 2006; Kuminoff,
Smith, & Timmins, 2013). Equilibrium sorting models study the pro-
cess that households sort themselves into different neighborhoods
accordingtotheirheterogeneouspreferencesandhouseholdcharac-
teristics. Similar to equilibrium sorting models, agent-based housing
models also consider heterogeneity and study the dynamic pro-
cess that individual households sort themselves into neighborhoods
based on their preferences and socio-demographic characteristics.
However,unlikeequilibriumsortingmodels,agent-basedmodelsdo
not impose market equilibrium conditions to settle the sorting pro-
cess. Rather, sorting emerges because of interactions between all
types of market participants in agent-based models.
Researchers have been developing agent-based models to study
emergent spatial phenomena, such as segregation (Crooks, 2010;
Feitosa, Le, & Vlek, 2011; Fossett, Dietrich, et al., 2009), urban sprawl
(Brown & Robinson, 2006) and gentriﬁcation (Torrens & Nara, 2007).
Sofar,fewerstudieshavefocusedonhousingpriceandhousingbub-
ble per se. One exception is the study byGeanakoplos et al. (2012),
who studied systemic risk using an agent-based model of the hous-
ing market. Another exception is the study byGilbert, Hawksworth,
and Swinney (2009), which proposed an agent-based model of the
English housing market. Some models have adopted a highly simpli-
ﬁed market representation. In fact, after reviewing 51 agent-based
models of urban residential choice,Huang, Parker, Filatova, and Sun
(2014) found that only 11 have represented the market price for-
mation process using some form of competitive bidding, meaning
agents make a bid for the ideal property that maximizes their objec-
tives, and the highest bid is accepted. An increasing number of
researchers have been arguing for better representation of the mar-
ket process in agent-based land use and housing models (Filatova,
Parker, & Van der Veen, 2009; Parker et al., 2012; Polhill, Parker, &
Gotts, 2007). In particular,Parker and Filatova (2008)argued that,
in order to properly model land and housing market, agent-based
models need to represent price formation in a more realistic way.
A number of agent-based models have used competitive bidding
as a price settling mechanism, in which buyers search for a hous-
inggoodthatmaximizestheirobjectives,andthentradewithsellers
via bilateral bidding and negotiation. The implementation of com-
petitive bidding differs in the number of actors included, the level
of empiricism, and expectation formation. For example, inFilatova
(2014),agentsderivetheirpriceexpectationfromanempiricalhedo-
nic
pricemodel.In Magliocca,Saﬁrova,McConnell,andWalls(2011) ,
the bilateral bidding takes place between both households and
developers, and developers and land owners. InEttema (2011),b u y -
ers and sellers update market perceptions using a Bayesian update
rules. Finally, inChen, Irwin, Jayaprakash, et al. (2011), households
derive their optimal bid using an auction model.
Regardingagentheterogeneity,householdscanbeheterogeneous
in budget (almost all do), preference (Filatova, Parker, & Van der
Veen, 2009; Gaube & Remesch, 2013; Haase, Lautenbach, & Seppelt,
2010; Wu, Birkin, & Rees, 2008), and risk attitudes (Filatova, 2014;
Ligmann-Zielinska, 2009). In terms of land heterogeneity, land can
be heterogeneous in location, such as distance to central business
district (Brown & Robinson, 2006; Filatova, Van Der Veen, & Parker,
2009), ﬂood risks (Filatova, Van Der Veen, & Parker, 2009), and
access to green space (Filatova, Parker, & Van der Veen, 2009). It can
also have heterogenous land quality (Augustijn-Beckers, Flacke, &
Retsios, 2011).
Onecontributionofthisstudyisthatweincludethelendingagent
(bank) in the model, which enables us to study the role of leverage
and lenient lending in the rise of housing bubbles. Leverage is cen-
tral in the housing crises in the 2000s: after examining the historical
relationship between interest rate and housing price,Dokko et al.
(2011) concluded that it is credit regulation and leverage, not low
interestrate,thatisbehindtherecenthousingboomandcrashinthe

184 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
2000s.Inaddition, Iacoviello(2005) foundthatleveragedramatically
magnify the response of aggregate demand to housing price shocks.
In this study, we will use the simulation model to investigate the
effect of various lending practices on housing price.
3. The agent–based model of the housing market
In this section, we describe the agent-based housing market
model following Grimm et al.’s (2010) overview, design concepts,
and details (ODD) protocol.
3.1. Entities and scales
The designofthehousingmarket isbasedonour interviewswith
two local real estate companies and several independent real estate
agents. The housing market sits on a spatial landscape. There are
ﬁve classes of market participating agents: the real estate agent, the
developer, the bank, buyers, and homeowners. Time is discrete and
each time period represents a month in real time. We start from
the landscape and then move on to the market participants. Finally,
we summarize the agent class structure using a uniﬁed modeling
language (UML) class diagram (Booch, 2005).
3.1.1. The landscape
The housing market sits on a two dimensional, symmetric land-
scape that contains 25 (5× 5) regions. In the center of the landscape
is downtown, surrounding downtown are suburbs, and surround-
ing suburbs are rural regions. The landscape is shown inFig. 2.W e
choose this stylized morphology, because we want the landscape to
remain general, but still able to capture the effect of neighborhood
interactions through residents relocation (Rosenthal, 2008), shared
public services (Glaeser et al., 2008), and environment (Ellen et al.,
2002). Moreover, we assume that houses within the same neigh-
borhood are standard and homogenous, comparable to the “typical
property” in a neighborhood described in Owusu-Ansah, Roberts,
Schulz,andWersing(2013).Thedevelopmentwithinneighborhoods
is non-spatial, and residences in each neighborhood have no unique
location. We make these simpliﬁcations because we are more inter-
ested in the submarket price index than individual property prices.
We use the emergent submarket housing price to represent the
regional housing price index, and derive the aggregate housing price
index.
Each neighborhood in the landscape has an exogenous location
quality index, which incorporates all exogenous factors that deter-
mine the attractiveness of the neighborhood,such as distance to city
center or accessibility to natural services. We assume that suburbs
have better location qualities than the city center, which has better
location quality than rural areas. The assignment of location quality
Fig. 2. The landscape.
is based on the general observation that households value both cen-
tralityandspace.Therefore,suburbswithaccesstobothareassigned
a higher value than the city center and rural areas (seeFig. 2).
Apart from the exogenous location quality, each neighborhood
also has an endogenous neighborhood quality. Neighborhood qual-
ity incorporates all endogenous factors that affect the attractiveness
of the neighborhood, such as public school quality and the qual-
ity of other amenities. Neighborhood quality is endogenous because
it is the emerging outcome of the endogenous choices made by
the households. As households move in and out of the neighbor-
hoods, they change the neighborhood quality simultaneously. In
this study, neighborhood index is measured by the mean income in
the neighborhood, normalized by the highest mean income across
the neighborhood during the period, so is bounded between zero
and one. Eq. (1) is the formula to calculate neighborhood index for
neighborhood g at timet,
nbhdQg
t =
∑
r∈Rg
t
yr
∑
r∈Rg
t
1
max
g∈G
⎧
⎨
⎩
∑
r∈Rg
t
yr
∑
r∈Rg
t
1
⎫
⎬
⎭
(1)
where Rg
t is the set of all residents in neighborhood g at time t,
and yr is the income of residentr. The numerator in Eq. (1)i st h e
mean income of residents living in regiong, and the denominator
is maximum mean income of residents across all regions. Thus the
neighborhoodindexistheratioofmeanincomeintheregionandthe
maximummeanincomeacrossregions,andisbydeﬁnitionbetween
0 (exclusive) and 1 (inclusive).
3.1.2. The mortgage contract and credit accessibility
A mortgage contract between the bank and buyer agent i for
a property in region g at time t is made up of the following
components:
• eligibility requirements
– maximum debt-to-income ratio, MaxDTI
– minimum down payment rate, down
• value of loan for agenti at timet in regiong, Li
t(g)
• loan maturity in months,M
• annual mortgage rate set by bank for agentiat timet, mi
t
• the associated property in regiongas the collateral of the loan.
Agent i is only eligible for a mortgage contract to buy a property
in region g at time of the loan application,t, if both the following
conditions are met:
pg
t − Li
ti(g)=d o w n• pg
t ≤ savingi (2)
mpi
t(g)
incomei ≡ DTIi
t(g) ≤ MaxDTI (3)
where pg
t is the price of property in regiong at the timet, incomei
is agent i′s monthly income, and savingi is agent i′s savings, which
is assumed exogenous and positively related to monthly income.
The ﬁrst condition ensure that the agent must have enough sav-
ingsforminimumdownpayment.Thesecondconditionensuresthat
the ratio of an agent’s monthly payment to income cannot exceed
the maximum debt-to-income ratio. The eligibility conditions are
an assumption in the model. They are consistent with business-as-
usual practices, according to the real estate agents we interviewed.
Monthly income is ﬁxed and heterogeneous across agents.

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 185
Loanmaturityissetto20 yearsor240 periods.Ineachperiodthe
remainingloanmaturityofagent iisdeductedbyone.Agent i′smort-
gage rate equals bank’s mortgage rate at the time the mortgage is
issuedanditdoesnotchangethroughoutthemortgagematurity(we
assume ﬁxed-rate mortgage). Agenti′s outstanding loan in regiong
at timetis deﬁned as,
Li
t =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
(1 −down) • pg∗
t if t = t(
1+ mt
12
)
•
(
Li
t−1 − mpi
t
)
if t < t ≤ t+ M
0 otherwise
(4)
where t is the time when the mortgage is issued,mpi
t is agent i′s
monthly mortgage payment, which is calculated as follows:Li
t(g),
mpi
t(g)
mpi
t =
⎧
⎨
⎩
mt
12
• Lit
1−( mt
12 )
M if t ≤ t ≤ t+ M
0 otherwise
(5)
3.1.3. Bank
The role of the bank is to give loans to homeowners at the agreed
mortgage terms described inSection 3.1.2. The bank also takes over
foreclosure houses and resells them in the housing market. We
assumethatthebankisrisk-neutral.Ineachperiod,thebankadjusts
the mortgage rate that it charges new borrowers, according to mort-
gagerisksinthepastandtherisk-freeinterestratesetbythecentral
bank. Although the model has only one representative bank agent, it
isassumedtorepresentsalargenumberofsmallhomogenousbanks.
Moreover, we do not consider other bank practices, such as reﬁ-
nance, mortgage bundling, and mortgage-backed securities, to avoid
over-complication. Because the bank is risk-neutral, the expected
return on the mortgage loans should equal the exogenous risk-free
return,
probD
t
• cot +(1− probD
t ) • (1+ mt)=1+ rF
t (6)
where probD
t is the default probability estimated by bank from his-
torical data, cot is the mean collateral rate of all the bank clients,
mt is the mortgage rate, andrF
t is risk-free return rate at timet.T h e
variable probD
t is deﬁned as follows:
probD
t =
∑
i∈C
I(client iwent into foreclosure)
∑
i∈C
1 (7)
where Cisthesetofallclientsborrowingfromthebank, Iistheindi-
cator function. The numerator in the above equation is the number
of clients who has gone into foreclosure, and the denominator is the
total number of clients. Thus the ratio of the two is the estimated
default probability of the bank at timet.
The mean collateral rate,cot is, is deﬁned as
cot =m i n
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
1+ rF
t ,
∑
i∈C
(
coi
t
• Li
t
)
∑
i∈I
Li
t
⎫
⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎭
(8)
where coi
t is the collateral rate of clienti, which is deﬁned as
coi
t =m i n
{
pi
t
Li
t
,1+ mi
}
(9)
where pi
t is value of client i′s property at time t, Li
t is agent i′s
outstandingloanvalueattime tand mi isclient i′sthemortgagerate.
The mortgage rate a bank charges at periodttherefore equals,
mt = 1+r F
t −probD
t
• cot
1 −probD
t
−1( 1 0 )
As cot ≤ 1+rF
t bydeﬁnition,thereisamonotonicincreasingrelation-
ship between mortgage rate and expected default probability. The
higher the expected default probability among existing borrowers,
the higher mortgage rate the bank will charge new borrowers.
3.1.4. Developer
The role of the developer is to supply new houses in each
neighborhood, endogenously determined by the current construc-
tion costs and housing price. We assume a 6-month construction
period for any new development. Although the model has only one
representative developer, it is designed to represent the aggregate
result of a large number of small, homogenous, competing develop-
ers in a competitive market. The representative developer behaves
in the same way a small proﬁt-maximizing developer would in a
competitive market. As indicated by classic economic theory, the
representative developer will supply the amount of new houses so
thatthemarginalcostofbuildingthenewhouseequalsthepricethe
house is expected to be sold. As a result, the number of houses being
built in each period differs in each region. More houses will be built
in regions with relatively high housing prices and low construction
costs.
We start with an empty city with no house or residents. There
is an initial burnout period where developers build new houses and
homeowners move into the city as houses are being built (output
from the burnout period is excluded in the analysis). Therefore, the
number of residents in each region, i.e. density, is the emergent out-
come of the process. The model is an open city model, meaning
people can enter and exit the city. We assume that regular house-
holds enter the market at the same rate as they leave the city (for
exogenous reasons such as job move). Investors, on the other hand,
decide when they want to buy or sell properties based on market
conditions. Therefore, the number of active investors is endogenous
in the model.
Moreover, in this model we choose not to impose a cap on the
numberofhousesineachregion.Instead,weintroduceanincreasing
marginal construction cost to constrain the number of houses being
built in a region. We assume that the cost of building an additional
house is higher if more houses have already been built in the area,
because of land scarcity, congestions and regulations. The advantage
of this approach is that it allows the developer to respond to price
inﬂation by building more houses and increasing housing supply.
The market therefore is able to adjust to a price inﬂation by increas-
ing supply. Endogenous developer supply is also found in the model
of Magliocca et al. (2011), where developer’s willingness to pay for
farmland depends on the level of rent in the housing market.
Inthispaperwedonotexplicitlymodeltheinteractionsbetween
the developer and land owners, as inMagliocca et al. (2011).F o r
simplicity, we draw from conventional economic theory that in a
competitive market, marginal production cost should equal price.
To avoid over-complication, we decide not to explicitly represent
individual developers and the internal competition in the devel-
oper market. Instead, we model one representative developer as the
sum of many small, homogenous developers in a competitive mar-
ket. We choose competitive market behavior because it is the most
standard,andevidencehasshownthatcompetitivemarketoutcome

186 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
can emerge from more generous conditions (Gode & Sunder, 1993;
Sunder,2003).We cautionthattheresultsfromthemodelshouldbe
applied to areas with a relatively competitive developer market.
More speciﬁcally, the total construction cost of buildingq houses
in regiongin periodtis assumed a quadratic function in the number
of houses being constructed in that period:
TCg
t (qg
t )= c1h+ c2
2
(
qg
t
)2
+ c3
2
(
Qg
t−1
)2
(11)
where c1, c2,a n dc3 are parameters for construction cost, which are
positive real numbers. Qg
t−1 is the total number houses existing in
region g at periodt −1; whileqg
t is the number of houses being con-
structed in regiong during period t. We assume that the more the
number of houses existing in the region, the more expensive it is to
build new constructions due to land scarcity, regulations, and so on.
qg
t for all regionsg ∈ Gis updated at the beginning of periodt,
Qg
t =
{0 for t =0
Qg
t−1 + qg
t for t >0 (12)
The marginal cost, which is the ﬁrst derivative of total cost with
respect toqg
t , therefore is
MCg
t (qg
t )= c1 + c2qg
t + c3Qg
t−1 (13)
The developer’s supply in regiong in period t is set where price
equals marginal cost T Dev periods ago, because the decision was
made T Dev periods ago, whereT Dev is the number of periods it takes
forthedevelopertobuildhouses,whichissettobesixmonthsinthe
model initialization:
pg
t−TDev = MCg
t
(
qg
t
)
= c1 + c2qg
t + c3Qg
t−TDev (14)
Hence qg
t equals,
qg
t =
pg
t−TDev − c1 − c3Qg
t−TDev
c2
−qStockg
t (15)
where stockg
t is housing stock in regiong at periodt that is updated
at the beginning of periodt,
qStockg
t =
{0 for t =0
qStockg
t−1 + qg
t −qSoldg
t for t >0 (16)
where soldg
t is the number of houses sold in regiong during period
t, which is given by
qSoldg
t =m i n
{
qg
t ,
pg
t − c1 − c3Qg
t−TDev
c2
}
(17)
The asking price for a newly constructed housej at periodt is its
marginal construction cost:
ask j,g
t = c1 + c2 • j+ c3Hg
t ∀j =1 ,2 ,... , qg
t (18)
Existinghousingstocksinregion gattime tarelistedforsaleatprice
c1 + c2 + c3Hg
t−1.
3.1.5. Real estate agent and housing price index
Weassumethereisonecentralizedrealestateagent,whosejobis
to settle market price in each period for all neighborhoods. The way
therealestateagentsettlesthepriceinthemodelisasfollows:First,
buyerssubmitbidsforahouseintheregionoftheirchoicetothereal
estate agent;at the same time,sellers submit an ask for the property
theyown.Thebidsandasksareprivateinformationavailableonlyto
therealestateagentandtheonewhosubmitsit.Aftertherealestate
agent has collected all the bids and asks for each region, it orders
Fig. 3. Price formation process of the real estate agent.

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 187
the bids from high to low, and the asks from low to high. The mar-
ket price is found at where the descending bids meet the ascending
asks. All the bids higher than the market prices are successful, and
soarealltheaskslowerthanthemarketprice.Transactionsarethen
carried out between successful buyers and sellers. In the process the
number of transactions is maximized.
Fig. 3 shows four possible cases in the price formation process
of the real estate agent.Fig. 3a shows the case where descending
bids cross ascending asks. Price is found where the two curves meet.
Fig.3bshowsthecasewheredescendingbidsdonotcrossascending
asks,andthenumberofoffersequalsthenumberofasks.Inthiscase
price is found by taking the average of the lowest offer and the high-
est ask.Fig. 3c shows the case where descending bids do not cross
ascending asks, and the number of bids exceeds the number of asks.
Since there are more bids than asks and buyers compete for sellers,
price is settled at then′s highest bid, wheren is the number of sell-
ers.Fig. 3d shows a mirror case ofFig. 3c, where the descending bids
do not cross the ascending asks, and the number of asks exceeds the
number of bids. Because there are more asks than bids and sellers
would have to compete for buyers, price is settled at then′s lowest
asks, wherenis the number of buyers.
Bids and asks to the right of the vertical lines in Fig. 3 are
unsuccessful and will remain in the market in the next period. The
price-settling process is consistent with economic principles, where
the descending bids and the ascending asks form the demand and
supply curves essentially. The buyers’ gain from trade is the area
between the (blue curve) descending bids and price (green dotted
line), whereas the seller’s gain from trade is the area between the
ascending asks (red curve) and price. As shown inFig. 3,t h ed i v i s i o n
ofgainsfromtradeisdeterminedbytherelativemarketpowerofthe
two sides. In a balanced market (Fig. 3a and b), the gains of trade are
approximatelyequalforbuyersandsellers.However,inasellermar-
ket (Fig. 3c), the sellers get most of the gains from the transaction,
whereas in a buyer market (Fig. 3d), the opposite is true.
Compared with competitive bilateral bidding mechanism used in
Parker and Filatova (2008), Filatova (2014), Magliocca et al. (2011)
and others, the price settling mechanism use in this paper will in
generalresultinalowerpricevolatility 1.Thereasonisthatinabilat-
eral bidding, every buyer’s willingness to pay (WTP) is reﬂected in
the price, which is settled between individual buyers and sellers;
whereas in this paper, a buyer’s willingness to pay is only reﬂected
in the order of all buyers, but only the last buyer’s willingness to
pay is used tosettle theprice.Therefore, price ﬂuctuationsfrom het-
erogonous WTP is removed using the above mechanism, resulting
in lower price volatility.Filatova, Van Der Veen, and Parker (2009)
discussed that buyers with the highest WTP for high-risk proper-
ties are more likely to win in a competitive bidding, and they are
the ones who drive the market outcomes. However, in spite of the
likely dampened price ﬂuctuations, the model is able to produces
volatile cycles of housing price (housing bubbles) from the existing
mechanism, which we will discuss inSection 5.
Finally, the aggregate housing price index is the average of all
submarkethousingpricesweightedbythenumberoftransactionsin
each submarket. The aggregate housing price index is derived as
pt =
∑
g∈G
(
ng
t
nt
)(
pg
t
pg
0
)
(19)
where pt is the aggregate price index, ng
t is the number of
transactions in neighborhood g during period t, nt is the total
number of transactions during periodt, pg
t is the housing price in
1 We give special thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this
observation.
neighborhood g during periodt,a n dpg
0 is the initial housing price in
neighborhood g.
3.1.6. Regular buyer’s property search
In every period t, a few thousand buyers start searching for a
property. When searching for a house, regular buyers care about
neighborhood quality such as school quality, location quality such
as centrality, and the house’s affordability. The objective of regu-
lar buyer b is to maximize the utility he/she gains from housing
consumption
max
g∈Fb
Ub
t (g) ≡ max
g∈Fb
(
nbhdQg
t
)bb
1 •
(
locQg )bb
2 •
(
compositeb,g
t
)bb
3
where Fb is the feasible choice set of regions for buyer b, which
includes a random subset of all regions the buyer can afford (buyer’s
eligibility for loans deﬁned in Eq. (2)), and the null option of not
buying.Althoughbuyershaveheterogeneouspreferenceparameters,
someattributeslikegoodlocation,goodneighborhood,andlowprice
are regarded as attractive factors by all. As a result, their bids tend
to be concentrated in a few neighborhoods if they can choose over
all regions. In reality, though, buyers have other constraints when
they choose their ideal location: for example, they may want to stay
in certain areas to be close to work or family. Therefore, I have the
buyers choose from a random subset, instead of all the regions, to
avoid over-concentration of bids and to account for buyers’ hetero-
geneous preferences for neighborhoods due to factors outside of the
model.
The variable nbhdQg is the neighborhood qualify in regiong,a n d
locQg isthelocationqualityinregion g.Theparameter,composite b,g
t ,
is the composite good buyer b is left to consume after buying a
property in regiong at timet, which is deﬁned as
compositeb,g
t = incomeb − mpi
t(g)( 2 0 )
where incomeb is buyerb′s monthly income, andmpi
t(g)i sb u y e rb′s
monthly payment derived in Eq. (5). The monthly payment calcula-
tionisbasedonthelast-periodmarketpriceoftheregion.Composite
good thus measures how affordable a house is in regiong.
The preference parameter vectorbb are the weights regular buy-
ers put on neighborhood quality, location quality, and affordability.
Preference parameters bs are conﬁned between zero and one; the
higher the relative value, the more important the element is in
determining the house of choice. Preference is heterogeneous across
buyers. For example, buyers who values neighborhood most highly
will have a large value forb1.
Once a regular buyer b has chosen g∗, the region that gives
him/herthehighestutility,shewillsubmitabidforahouseinregion
g∗ to the real estate agent. Buyerb′s bid depends on the last period
price, and his/her time on market (TOM),
bidb,g∗
t =( 1− g+ d • TOMb
t ) • pg∗
t−1 (21)
where g is a buyer’s initial discount on current price, assumed to be
10% in this study,d is the increase in bid for each period the buyer’s
bid is not accepted and the buyer stays on market, which is assumed
to be 2% in this study,pg∗
t−1 is the last periodprice in buyerb′sc h o s e n
region g∗,andTOM b
t istheperiodoftimebuyer bhasalreadybeenon
market at periodt. We assume that the longer a buyer has been on
market and not able to obtain a successful bid, the more competitive
his/her bid will be.

188 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
Oncethepriceissettledbytherealestateagent,regularbuyer b′s
action in periodt, ab
t , is deﬁned as
ab
t =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
buy a house and become a homeowner if bidb,g∗
t ≥ pg∗
t
enter period t+1, TOMb
t+1 =T O Mb
t +1 ifbid b,g∗
t < pg∗
t and TOMb
t <MaxTOM
exit market if bid b,g∗
t < pg∗
t and TOMb
t ≥ MaxTOM
where MaxTom is the maximum time on market. A buyer will con-
tinue to increase his/her bid until the time he/she has been on the
market exceeds the maximum waiting period. Then, the buyer will
leave the market.
3.1.7. Speculative buyer’s property search
The number of speculative buyers can range from zero to a few
thousand, depending on the speculation index, which is a key treat-
mentfactorinthemodel.Speculativebuyersbuyapropertytomake
proﬁt from housing price inﬂation and from the rental income it
generates. When searching for a house for investment, a specula-
tive buyer is looking for the highest expected annual return he/she
can ﬁnd, which is determined by the expected price inﬂation in the
region and the mortgage rate. In particular, expected annual return
rate of speculative buyerbfor a property in regiongequals
ERb
t (g)=( 1 − yb)
(
pg
t
pg
t−12
−1
)
− mt − rH (22)
where yb isthediscountratethatspeculativebuyer bassignstoprice
appreciation, which is heterogeneous across buyers andyb ∈ (0,1).
The term
pg
t
pg
t−12
is the appreciation in housing price in regiongduring
the last 12 months. We assume a speculator’s expectation regarding
future price appreciation to be a fraction of the past price appre-
ciation. In other words, we assume that speculators are backward-
looking and adopt an adaptive expectation for future housing price
(Evans & Honkapohja, 2001).
Apart from expectation of future price, a speculator’s expected
annual return also depends on the annual mortgage rate at timet
(denoted mt),andtheannualholdingcosts(denoted rH),whichisthe
sum of property tax rate, transaction cost as percentage of property
value, and depreciation rate, subtracted by rental income as a per-
centage of property value. Transaction costs are costs payable to
the real estate agent when a transaction is carried out. Although a
property may not be traded every year, we believe that the transac-
tion costs should be included in calculating annual return, because
speculators expect to trade a property in the short run and proﬁt is
only realized after a property is sold. Finally, annual rental income
is assumed a ﬁxed percentage of the property value, partly because
it is consistent with the economic theory that the rent/price ratio
should be stationary at the equilibrium in the long run (Poterba,
1984). Empirical evidence also shows that housing prices and rents
move in the same direction (Davis, Lehnert, & Martin, 2008; Engsted
&Pedersen,2015).However,weacknowledgethatduringaperiodof
rapidpriceappreciation,therent/priceratiocandepartfromitslong-
term equilibrium. However, we do not think that the rental market
is the main driver of housing price bubbles.
Thus, speculative buyerb′s objective function is,
max
g∈Fb
ERb
t (g) (23)
where Fb is the feasible choice set of regions for speculative buyerb,
which includes a random subset of all regions the buyer can afford
(buyer’s eligibility for loans is deﬁned in Eq. (2)), and the null option
of not buying. We assumeER(null) = rF
t
• down, the risk-free return
on down payment.
Fig. 4. Main agent classes in the agent-based housing market model.

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 189
During month t, speculative buyerb searches each region in the
feasible choice set, and choosesg∗, the region that gives him/her the
highest expected return. Regular buyerb′s bid at periodtfor a house
in regiong∗ equals,
bidb,g∗
t =
⎧
⎨
⎩
(
1+ER b
t (g∗)/12
)
• pg∗
t−1 ifg∗ ⁄=n u l l
0i f g∗ =n u l l
(24)
Once the price is settled by the real estate agent, for a speculative
buyer b, his/her action at timetequals,
ab
t =
{
buy a house and become a homeowner if bidb,g∗
t ≥ pg∗
t
exit market if bidb,g∗
t < pg∗
t
3.1.8. Regular homeowner’s selling and default rules
Once a regular buyerb has succeeded in the purchase of a house
in the chosen regiong∗, he/she becomes a regular homeownerh in
region g(b).There are about 20,000regular homeownersin theland-
scape. At the beginning of each period, homeownerh can hold, list,
or default on the property. Thus, a regular homeownerh′sa c t i o na t
period t, ah
t ,i s
ah
t =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
default on the property if pg∗
t−1 +DC h < Lh
t
list the property, if h sells house for external reasons
ask = (1+g − d • TOMh
t )pg∗
t−1
hold the property otherwise
where Lh
t is homeowner h′s outstanding loan at timet, DCh is the
default cost of homeownerh, g is the targeted margin over current
price,whichissettobe10%inthisstudy, disthepercentagedecrease
in price each period a seller’s bid is not accepted, which is set to 2%
in this study,ph,g∗
t−1 is the price in the region in periodt −1, and TOMh
t
is sellerh′s time one market at periodt.
Aregularhomeownerwilldefaultifthepriceofthepropertyplus
thedefaultcostsfallbelowthevalueoftheoutstandingloan.Default
costs are costs associated with default and foreclosure, such as legal
cost,lossofcredibility,andmentalstress.Defaultcostofhomeowner
h is assumed proportional to the monthly income of homeownerh
in this study. Moreover, there is a small probability that any home-
owner will need to sell the house for exogenous reasons such as job
move.Ifthathappens,homeowner hwilllisttheproperty.Otherwise
the homeowner will hold it.
Fig. 5. Activity diagram of the agent-based housing market model.

190 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
3.1.9. Speculative homeowner’s selling and default rules
The number of speculative buyers can range from zero to tens
of thousands, depending on the speculation index, which is a key
treatment factor in the model. A speculative homeowner will sell
the property if it is no longer proﬁtable to keep it. In particular,
speculative homeownerh′s objective is
max
default, hold, list
ERh,g∗
t (25)
where Rh,g∗
t is speculative buyer h′s expected return rate on the
property he/she currently owns in regiong∗ at timet.
Thus, speculative buyerh′s action at periodtis,
ah
t =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
default on the property if pg∗
t−1 +DC h < Lh
t
list the house, ask =
(
1+ ERh,g∗
t /12
)
pg∗
t−1 if hdoes not default and
ERh,g∗
t < ER(null)
hold the property if hdoes not default and
ERh,g∗
t ≥ ER(null)
where as we deﬁned before, ER(null) = rF
t
• down, the risk-free
return on down payment. Unlike a regular homeowner who lists
the house for exogenous reasons, a speculative homeowner will list
the house only if the expected return on the property is negative,
which depends on the market conditions and is endogenous. Similar
toaregularhomeowner,aspeculativehomeownerwilldefaultifthe
priceofthepropertyplusthedefaultcostsfallbelowthevalueofthe
outstanding loan.
Fig. 4 summarizes the main agent classes in the model using a
UML class diagram.
3.2. Process overview and scheduling
In this section, we discuss the process and scheduling of the
agent-basedmodel.Atthebeginningofeveryperiod,existinghome-
owners would decide to list their property on the market. At the
sametime,afewhundrednewbuyerswouldenterthehousingmar-
ket.Weassumeabalancedregionscenariowherethenumberofnew
comers approximately equals the number of people who want to
leave.Wefurtherdistinguishbuyersandhomeownersasregularand
speculative. The number of speculative buyers versus the number
of non-speculative buyers represents the level of speculation in the
market,whichisoneofthetreatmentfactorsandwillvaryaccording
to the experimental design described inSection 4.
The model starts with an empty landscape with no houses built
and no homeowners. Each period in the model represents a month
in real time. The ﬁrst 300 periods are treated as burnout periods,
during which developers build new houses and homeowners grad-
ually populate the city. The city is open, meaning new homeowners
are created and move into the landscape, while existing homeown-
ers move out and exit the model. At the beginning of each period,
a number of heterogeneous speculative and nonspeculative buy-
ers are newly created to enter the market in search of a house.
Meanwhile, existing homeowners in the region can decide whether
tolisttheirhousesforsale,todefaultortoremainstatusquo,accord-
ing to the decision rules described inSection 3. This process can be
summarized in the following ﬂow chart:
Step 1 At the beginning of period t (each period represents a
month in real time),The Real Estate Agent : Update set-
tled housing prices in all neighborhoods from last period
The Bank: Update asset portfolio and mortgage rate for
new borrowers
Step 2 The Developer: Decide the number of new houses to
build in each neighborhood, depending on the housing
price in the last periodA Homeowner: Decides whether
to default on their houses, list their houses in the hous-
ing market and submit an ask to the real estate agent, or
remain status quo and pay monthly payment to the bank
AB u y e r: Searches a selected number of neighborhoods,
decide whether to purchase, if so in which neighborhood,
and submit a bid to the real estate agent accordingly
Step 3 The Real Estate Agent: Collects all the bids and asks, and
settles the market price
Step 4 A Homeowner: If the ask is accepted, sells the house, and
exits the market AB u y e r: If the bid is accepted, buys a
house, becomes a homeowner and a borrower from the
bank
Step 5 Updatetto t+1. Go to Step 1.
In order to illustrate the process in the context of agent classes,
Fig. 5summarizes the activity ﬂow of each agent class and the inter-
actionsbetweenthemusinganUMLactivitydiagram.Theredarrows
represent information ﬂows, and the black arrows represent action
ﬂows.
3.3. Initialization
Inthissection,weshowtheinitializationoftheparametersinthe
agent-based model.Table 1lists the parameters, the corresponding
symbols used inSection 3.1, the type and range of the parameters,
and the value or distribution used.
4. Treatment factors and experimental design
We identify two treatment factors we believe that are key to the
rise and collapse of housing price: leniency index,l, and speculation
index, s. The ﬁrst treatment factor, leniency index (l), is deﬁned as
one minus the down payment rate required. It measures the degree
of leniency or leverage in mortgage loans.
l =1 −down (26)
Leverage, deﬁned as the ratio of debt to collateral, has a positive
one-to-one relationship with leniency:
leverage = 1
1 − l −1 (27)
When down payment is 100%, leniency and leverage are zero; when
down payment is 0%, leniency is 1, and leverage becomes inﬁnity.
As previously stated, leverage plays an important role in housing
market. Since the US housing market crises, researchers have been
studying the role of leverage in the formation of housing bubbles
(Bernanke,2010;Dokkoetal.,2011 ).Inthisstudy,weinvestigatethe
relationship between leniency (or leverage) and the rise of housing
bubble.
The second treatment factor, speculation index (s), is deﬁned as
the percentage of speculative buyers in all buyers. The higher the
s, the more speculative buyers exist relative to regular buyers, and
the higher the degree of speculation in the market. By making the
numberofspeculativebuyersatreatmentfactor,however,wedonot
control the number of active speculators who participate in buying
or selling properties, because it is buyer’s decision based on market
conditions and expectation. The speculation index is used to control
the number of potential speculators, who could be inactive unless
they spot a proﬁtable buying or selling opportunity.
As there are two treatment factors, our experimental design is
two dimensional. By deﬁnition, leniency index is bounded between

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 191
Table 1
Parameters initialization.
Parameter Symbola Type/range Value/distribution
Construction cost part i c1 R+b 50.0
Construction cost part ii c2 R+ 1.0
Construction cost part iii c3 R+ 0.5
Default cost as number of monthly income R+ 12
Inﬂation discount rate y R, y ∈ (0,1) U(0,1)c
Loan maturity in periods M I+b 240
Maximum debt to income ratio MaxDTI R+ 0.5
Maximum time on market in months MaxTOM I+ 12
Monthly income income R+ exp(N(0,1))d
Number of construction periods TDev R+ 6
Number of regions in feasible set I+ 13
Number of regular buyers as percentage of regular
homeowners
R+ 0.05
Preference parameter for neighborhood quality b1 R, b1 ∈ [0,1] U(0,1)
Preference parameter for location quality b2 R, b2 ∈ [0,1] U(0,1)
Preference parameter for composite good b3 R, b3 ∈ [0,1] U(0,1)
Property tax rate R+ 1%
Regular homeowner’s probability to sell for external
reasons
R+ 0.05
Rent/price ratio R+ 5%
Risk-free return rate at time at time 0 rF
t R 0
Savings as number of monthly income R+ U(3,21)
Transaction cost rate R+ 4%
a As inSection 3.1.
b R:r e a ln u m b e r s ;I: integers.
c U(a, b): uniform distribution with lower bounda and upper boundb.
d N(l, s): normal distribution with meanl and standard deviations.
zero and one. Yet our sampling has not been uniformly distributed
between zero and one. The sampling is denser in a more realistic
range and less so in the rest. We believe that a realistic range for
leniency index should be between 0.6 and 1, which corresponds
to the down payment range between 40% and 0%. This will be the
densely sampled region for leniency index. The second treatment
factor, speculation index, is also bounded between zero and one by
design. We believe that a more realistic range for speculation index
would be between 0 and 0.75, meaning that the number of specu-
lative buyers as a percentage of total number of buyers ranges from
0% and 75%. This will be the densely sampled region for speculation
index.
Husslage, Rennen, van Dam, and den Hertog (2011)showed that
a design for computer experimentsshould satisfy two criteria: space
ﬁllingandnoncollapsing.Theﬁrstcriteria,spaceﬁlling,indicatesthat
the experiment should be designed to obtain information from the
entireparameterspace,whichisaone-by-onesquareinourcase.The
second criteria, noncollapsing, shows that there should be no irrel-
evant parameters, whose value does not affect the function values.
Both our parameters signiﬁcantly affect the function values, as will
be shown inSection 5. Therefore, our experimental design satisﬁes
both criteria.
Fig.6 showsourexperimentaldesign.Eachcellrepresentsacom-
bination of parameter values. With parameter combination, we run
the model 20 times. Each run consists of 800 time steps, with the
ﬁrst 300 as the burnout period and the last 500 used for analysis.
We then calculate the mean and standard deviation of the function
values generated from the parameter combination. In order to test
the robustness of sample size, we randomly pick 20% of all param-
eter combinations and run the model 100 times. In all cases, the
difference in mean functional values between 20 and 100 runs
is <5%.
We also identify two key functional values or model results. The
ﬁrst functional value is housing price volatility, deﬁned as the ratio
of standard deviation to mean of housing prices. Price volatility is
used here as an indicator for the extent of housing bubble that exists
in the market. When a housing bubble is present, price volatility is
high and vice versa. Although economists have not agreed on the
measure of the existence and extent of housing bubble ex-ante yet
(Case & Shiller, 2003; Krugman, 2005, 2009), in the agent-based
model we can measure the extent of housing bubble by calculat-
ing price volatility ex-post. The second functional value is the total
numberofregularhomeownersinthearea,asanindicatorforhome-
ownershiprate.Becauseoneofthemainmotivationandjustiﬁcation
forlenientlendingpolicyisthatitenableslow-incomehouseholdsto
becomehomeowners,wewillanalyzetheactualeffectofsuchpolicy
on homeownership rate in this study.
5. Results
In this section, we present simulation results of the agent-based
simulation. First, we present illustrated results for single-simulation
runs, and then for the full experiment.
Fig. 6. Experimental design for two treatments: speculation (s) and leniency (l).

192 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
low leniency high leniency
Fig. 7. Housing price under different level of leniency (l).
5.1. Illustrated results for single simulation runs
For single simulation runs, we show the housing price, foreclo-
surerate,mortgagerateandbank’sexpectedproﬁtatdifferentlevels
of leniency and speculation. The time span is 500 months. We start
with the effect of leniency in the presence of speculation. Fig. 7
showssimulatedhousingpricewithlow(0.8)andhigh(0.9)leniency
indicesinthepresenceofspeculation(speculationindexﬁxedat0.5).
It shows that leniency leads to the rise and collapse of housing price.
Fig.8 showshousingpriceandthecorrespondingforeclosurerate,
deﬁnedasthepercentageofforeclosuresinallhomes,withlow(0.8)
andhigh(0.9)leniencyindicesinthepresenceofspeculation(specu-
lation index ﬁxed at 0.5). The results show that when leniency index
is low, foreclosure is very rare; on the contrary, when leniencyindex
is high and when the price collapses, foreclosure is wide-spread.
Fig. 9shows housing price and mortgage rate under low and high
leniency indices in the presence of speculation (speculation index
ﬁxed at 0.5). With low leniency index, mortgage rate remains sta-
ble. With high leniency index, however, mortgage rate is low when
the housing price rises, but increases rapidly when housing price
collapses.
Fig.10 showshousingpriceandbank’sexpectedproﬁtunderlow
andhighleniencyindicesinthepresenceofspeculation(speculation
index ﬁxed at 0.5). With low leniency index, bank’s expected proﬁt
is stable and does not ﬂuctuate much over time. With high leniency
index,however,itsexpectedproﬁtbecomeshighlyvolatile.Interest-
ingly, under lenient lending practice, bank’s expected proﬁt is much
higher than under prudent lending, until the bubble bursts. The rea-
son that the bank can have higher proﬁt under lenient practices is
because by pursuing loan quantity instead of quality, the bank stim-
ulates the market and increases the price. Although the bank may
attract riskier borrowers by doing so, it can still expect higher proﬁt
as long as the property price remains high. However, such growth
is not sustainable. When the bubble collapses, the bank will suffer
signiﬁcantlosses,whichhashappenedthreetimesinthesimulation.
If the bank is suﬃciently long-term minded, it will choose pru-
dent over lenient lending to avoid long-term losses. However, the
average CEO tenure in the US ﬁnancial industry is around ﬁve years
(Stuart, 2004). In comparison, in simulation the ﬁrst big loss does
not happen until the 11th year since the lenient lending policy. Until
then, bank has been getting tripled proﬁt.
We have shown the effect of lenientlendingpractices on housing
price,foreclosurerate,mortgagerate,andbankproﬁtinthepresence
of speculation. We will now show the effect of speculation on hous-
ing price and foreclosure rate in the presence of leniency (leniency
index ﬁxed at 0.9).Fig. 11 shows housing price where speculative
demand equals zero (s= 0) and where speculative demand equals
half of the total demand (s=0 .5), in the presence of leniency. We
ﬁnd that with no speculative demand, price does not ﬂuctuate much
even in the presence of leniency. We conclude that lenient lend-
ing practice will only lead to housing bubbles if there is speculative
demand in the market.
Fig. 12shows foreclosure rate with and without speculative buy-
ers, with leniency index ﬁxed at 0.9. The foreclosure rate is close to
zero without speculative buyers; whereas it can become as high as
15% with speculative buyers. However, it does not necessarily mean
that only speculative homeowners are responsible for mortgage
default. In fact, both speculative and regular homeowners are prone
to default when housing price is more volatile. The high foreclosure
rate is a direct result of large volatility in housing price.
Speculation index could be affected by culture, regional hous-
ing market history, and the availability of alternative investment
low leniency high leniency
Fig. 8. Foreclosure rate (red) and housing price under different levels of leniency (l).

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 193
low leniency high leniency
Fig. 9. Mortgage rate (red) and housing price under different level of leniency (l).
opportunities.Incountrieswheresocialvaluesareattachedtohome-
ownership (An Englishman’s house is his castle), it is more common
for people to invest in the property market. In countries where the
property market has produced good returns in the past, people are
more likely to invest, and vice versa. Finally, in countries without
a mature ﬁnancial market, people rely on the housing market for
investment opportunities, which are diﬃcult to ﬁnd elsewhere.
5.2. Full experiment results for the densely sampled region
So far, we have shown results from single simulation runs. We
will now show results for the full experiment. In order to save space,
we only show the mean functional values for the densely-sampled
parameter space here. The mean and standard deviation of the two
functional values for the complete parameter space can be found in
AppendixA. Fig.13 presentsaheatmapforhousingpricevolatilityat
differentcombinationsofleniencyandspeculation.Thevaluesinthe
cellsarethemeanhousingpricevolatilityfromsimulation.Cellswith
higher values are in darker shades, representing a “hot” market with
high price volatility; on the contrary, cells with lower values are in
lightershades,representinga“cool”marketwithlowpricevolatility.
We show that volatility is low when both leniency and speculation
arelow,andviceversa,andweconcludethathousingpricevolatility
is increasing as both leniency and speculation increase.
low leniency high leniency
Fig. 10. Bank’s expected proﬁt (red) and housing price under different level of leniency (l).
low speculation high speculation
Fig. 11. Housing price under different levels of speculation (s).

194 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
low speculation high speculation
Fig. 12. Foreclosure rate (red) and housing price under different level of speculation (s).
Fig. 14plots leniency, speculation, and housing price volatility on
thethree-dimensional(3D)space.Weseethatthepeakoccursinthe
northeast corner where both leniency and speculation indices are
high. The increase in volatility with regard to leniency and specula-
tion is nonlinear. Volatility remains low and ﬂat in most areas and
increases sharply in the northeast corner. In particular, price volatil-
ity stays ﬂat until leniency index is about 0.85, and then it increases
sharply. We will further explore the nonlinear relationship between
leniency and volatility by looking at an intersecting surface with
speculation index ﬁxed at a certain level, which is shown inFig. 15.
Fig. 15shows the relationship between leniency index and price
volatility, with speculation index ﬁxed at 0.5. We ﬁnd that the rela-
tionship is nonlinear: Volatility remains low until leniency index
reaches 0.85. After that, it increases quickly as leniency index
increases. Therefore, we argue that lending policies do not need
to be prohibitively restrictive to prevent housing price bubbles. A
moderate down payment requirement of 15% should be suﬃcient
to prevent a housing bubble from forming, and still allow regular
households to obtain a mortgage and become homeowners.
Fig. 16 presents a heat map for the number of nonspeculative
homeowners. The value in each cell is the mean number of nonspec-
ulative homeowners, an indicator for the level of home-ownership.
We ﬁnd that homeownership rate is maximum when speculation
is low and leniency is also relatively low. As speculation demand
dominates the market, homeownership rate among nonspeculative
households decreases rapidly as they are crowded out of the market
byspeculativebuyersthroughinﬂatedhousingprice.Therefore,poli-
cies that aim to help low-income home buyers by lowering lending
criteria may have the opposite effect under certain conditions.
As we have discussed inSection 3, a number of model assump-
tions could dampen price volatility. For instance, the price set-
tling mechanism in this study is likely to produce smaller price
Fig. 13. Housing price volatility in the densely sampled region.
Fig. 14. Leniency, speculation, and housing price volatility.

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 195
Fig. 15. Leniency and housing price volatility.
ﬂuctuations than competitive bidding. Speculators in the model are
conservative in that they assume future appreciation rate to be a
fraction of the previous one, i.e. a slowing market trend. In addi-
tion, interest rate remains ﬁxed for the duration of the mortgage,
and there is no external income shock, both of which would greatly
increase price volatility. We have shown that, despite the conser-
vative settings that we assume, the model has produced cyclical
behavior in housing price and large price volatility under certain
conditions.
5.3. Submarket variations
In this section we will describe variations in housing price and
price volatilityacross 25submarkets. InSection3.1.1,weintroduced
a symmetric landscape with 25 neighborhoods. Each neighborhood
has the exogenous nature index and the endogenous neighborhood
index. Fig. 17a shows the nature index, which is exogenous and
ﬁxed; whereas, Fig. 17b shows the neighborhood index, which is
endogenousandevolvesfromthemodel.Wefoundthat,asexpected,
neighborhood index highly correlates with nature index. The corre-
lation emerges through the sorting process in which high-income
households outbid low-income ones and move into the most attrac-
tive suburban neighborhood. As high-income households move into
those neighborhoods, neighborhood quality also increases, which
makes those neighborhoods even more attractive.
Fig.18 showsthemeanhousingpriceacrossneighborhood,when
leniency index equals 0.8 and 0.9. We keep speculation index at 0.5.
In Fig. 18, the darker the shade, the higher the housing price in that
neighborhood. As expected, we ﬁnd that prices are higher in more
attractive suburbs than in urban or rural regions. We also ﬁnd that,
under lenient ﬁnancing, housing price inﬂates more in the most and
least expensive areas than in middle-ranged areas.
Fig. 19shows the housing price volatility or the standard devi-
ation over mean housing price across regions, when leniency index
equals 0.8 and 0.9. We keep speculation index at 0.5. The darker the
shade inFig. 19, the more volatile housing price is in that neighbor-
hood. We ﬁnd that in all submarkets, housing price becomes much
more volatile under lenient ﬁnancing (l = 0.9) than under prudent
ﬁnancing (l = 0.8). Price volatility in all submarkets increases sub-
stantiallyinthepresenceoflenientﬁnancing.Moreover,weﬁndthat
prices are less volatile in the more expensive neighborhoods, and
more volatile in less expensive ones.
5.4. Qualitative comparison with historical home price index
Finally, we make a qualitative comparison of the quarterly US
home price index (Index, 2013) from 1970 to 2012 and the simula-
tion results over the same period of time. In the simulation, before
2000,downpaymentandmarketinterestratesaresetat15%and4%,
respectively. In January 2000, we introduced lenient lending prac-
tices into simulation and decreased down payment from 15% to 4 %.
We also decreased the risk-free interest rate from 4% to 1% to rep-
resent the low risk-free interest rate in the United States over the
same period of time. We then let the model run without other inter-
vention.Fig. 20shows a comparison of real US home price index and
simulated index. We use price in 1970 as the baseline.
The two pictures share similar patterns. Both show rise of hous-
ing price around 2000 when regulation was loosened and lenient
lendingpracticesstartedtobecameprevalent.Bothgraphsshowthat
prices collapse without apparent sign of economic shocks. However,
we are cautious not to overstate the forecasting power of the model,
because the model is not designed forecast the future price move-
ment, but to provide a theoretical framework. We compared the
simulated and historic housing price indices to show that our model
is able to generate aggregate price patterns observed in reality.
6. Concluding remarks
This study develops an agent-based model of the housing mar-
ket. We attempt to answer the research questions: Will housing
bubbles rise endogenously in a housing market without external
shocks?Ifso,whatarethecausesoftheendogenousriseandcollapse
of housing price? We ﬁnd that housing price can indeed rise and
collapse endogenously in the absence of exogenous shocks. The two
Fig. 16. Number of non-speculative homeowners in the densely sampled region.
Fig. 17. Nature and emerged neighborhood index.

196 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
low leniency high leniency
Fig. 18. Mean housing price across submarkets.
necessary conditions for a housing bubble to rise are leniency and
speculation. The simulation results in this paper is consistent with
stylized facts and patterns in the real world. For example, although
the United States and Canada are similar in economic and cultural
conditions,thelattermaintainedlesslenientlendingpracticesinthe
2000s and did not experience a boom and crash as the former did
Crawford (2015).
We ﬁnd that a bank may prefer lenient lending practice even
without risk shifting schemes like mortgage securitization. Results
show that in the short run the bank’s proﬁt increases rapidly under
lenient lending policy. Only in the long run will it suffer losses as
a consequence of its aggressive lending practices. Given the typical
short tenure of management in the ﬁnancial sector, it is unsurpris-
ingthatbankswouldchooselenientlendingforhigherreturnsinthe
shortrun.Wethereforeconcludethatregulationonmortgagesecuri-
tization alone is insuﬃcient to prevent aggressive lending practices,
and reforms should be aimed at aligning banks’ objectives with its
long-run performance.
We show that policy intended to promote homeownership
among low-income households can have unintended consequences.
Beginning in the early 2000s, government sponsored entities in the
United States such as Frannie Mae and Freddie Mac decided to
lower lending criteria as a way to promote homeownership among
low-income households. However, our simulation shows that such
policy can lead to large inﬂation in housing price and more specula-
tive behavior. In contrast to the goal of the policy, homeownership
rate among regular buyers become lower under such policy, as low-
income households are crowded out of the market through inﬂated
housing price.
We conclude that speculators play an essential role in the rise of
ahousingbubble.Weﬁndthattheexistenceofspeculatorsisneeded
for a housing bubble to rise. In a market without speculative buy-
ers, housing price is more stabilized regardless of lending criteria.
Therefore, to avoid a housing bubble, policy interventions such as
land transfer tax or property tax can be used to discourage specula-
tive demand. For example, a foreign buyers tax recently introduced
in Vancouver, Canada has led to stalled prices in the previously hot
market Pearson, (2016). The model developed in this paper can be
used to study the effect of such policy interventions.
Finally, we have made several simpliﬁcations in the paper due to
scope and computational constraints. For example, we do not dis-
tinguish houses within a neighborhood.We assume a representative
developer and bank that operates under competitive market prin-
ciple, while in reality banks and developers can engage in strategic
games. The model can be extended in several ways. For instance,
the stylized city landscape can be adapted to a real-world city and
individual houses modeled, given suitable data. We will leave the
potential extensions for future research.
low leniency high leniency
Fig. 19. Housing price volatility across submarkets.
Fig. 20. Actual and simulated home price index, 1970=100.

J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198 197
Fig. 21. Housing price volatility in complete parameter space (standard deviation in parenthesis, densely sampled region in red square).
Fig. 22. Number of non-speculative homeowners in complete parameter space (standard deviation in parenthesis, densely sampled region in red square).
Appendix A. Full experiment results
Housing price volatility for complete parameter space is shown inFig. 21, and the Number of non-speculative homeowners for complete
parameter space is shown inFig. 22.
References
Augustijn-Beckers, E.-W., Flacke, J., & Retsios, B. (2011). Simulating informal set-
tlement growth in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: An agent-based housing model.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 35(2), 93–103. Geospatial Analysis
and Modeling.
Banzhaf, H. S., & Walsh, R. P. (2008).Do people vote with their feet? An empirical test
of Tiebout’s mechanism.The American Economic Review, 843–863.
Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., & McMillan, R. (2007). A uniﬁed framework for measuring
preferences for schools and neighborhoods, Tech. rep. ,
Bernanke, B. S. (2010).Monetary policy and the housing bubble.Speech at the annual
meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia . Vol. 3.
Booch, G. (2005).The uniﬁed modeling language user guide, Pearson Education India.
Brown, D. G., & Robinson, D. T. (2006). Effects of heterogeneity in residen-
tial preferences on an agent-based model of urban sprawl.Ecology and society ,
11(1), 46.
Calabrese, S., Epple, D., Romer, T., & Sieg, H. (2006).Local public good provision: Vot-
ing, peer effects, and mobility.Journal of Public Economics, 90(6), 959— 981.
Can,A.(1992). Speciﬁcationandestimation ofhedonichousingpricemodels. Regional
science and urban economics, 22(3), 453–474.
Case, K. E., & Shiller, R. J. (2003).Is there a bubble in the housing market?Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2003(2), 299–362.
Chen, Y., Irwin, E. G., & Jayaprakash, C. (2011).An agent-based model of exurban land
development. Agricultural and applied economics association: 2011 annual meeting.
Commission, F. C. I. (2011). The ﬁnancial crisis inquiry report: The ﬁnal report of the
national commission on the causes of the ﬁnancial and economic crisis in the United
States including dissenting views, Cosimo, Inc.
Crawford, A. (2015).Building stable mortgage markets: Lessons from Canada’s expe-
rience. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , 47(S1), 81–86.
Crooks, A. T. (2010).Constructing and implementing an agent-based model of res-
idential segregation through vector GIS. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 24(5), 661—67 5.
Davis, M. A., Lehnert, A., & Martin, R. F. (2008).The rent-price ratio for theaggregate
stock of owner-occupied housing.Review of Income and Wealth, 54(2), 279–284.
Dokko, J., Doyle, B. M., Kiley, M. T., Kim, J., Sherlund, S., Sim, J., & Van den Heuvel, S.
(2011). Monetary policy and the global housing bubble.Economic Policy, 26(66),
237—28 7.

198 J. Ge / Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 62 (2017) 182–198
Ellen, I. G., Schill, M. H., Susin, S., & Schwartz, A. E. (2002).Building homes, reviv-
ing neighborhoods: Spillovers from subsidized construction of owner-occupied
housing in New York city.Low income homeownership: Examining the unexamined
goal, 447–477.
Engsted, T., & Pedersen, T. Q. (2015).Predicting returns and rent growth in the hous-
ing market using the rent-price ratio: Evidence from the OECD countries.Journal
of International Money and Finance, 53, 257–275.
Ettema, D. (2011).A multi-agent model of urban processes: Modelling relocation pro-
cesses and price setting in housing markets.Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 35(1), 1–11.
Evans, G. W., & Honkapohja, S. (2001).Learning and expectations in macroeconomics ,
Princeton University Press.
Feitosa, F. F., Le, Q. B., & Vlek, P. L. (2011).Multi-agent simulator for urban segregation
(MASUS):Atooltoexplorealternativesforpromotinginclusivecities. Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems, 35(2), 104—11 5.
Filatova,T.(2015). Empiricalagent-basedlandmarket:Integratingadaptiveeconomic
behavior in urban land-use models.Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
54, 397–413.
Filatova, T., Parker, D., & Van der Veen, A. (2009a).Agent-based urban land mar-
kets: Agent’s pricing behavior, land prices and urban land use change.Journal of
Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, 12(1), 3.
Filatova, T., Van Der Veen, A., & Parker, D. C. (2009b). Land market interac-
tions between heterogeneous agents in a heterogeneous landscape—Tracing the
macro-scale effects of individual trade-offs between environmental amenities
and disamenities. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics/Revue canadienne
d’agroeconomie, 57(4), 431–457.
Fossett, M., & Dietrich, D. R. (2009).Effects of city size, shape, and form, and neigh-
borhood size and shape in agent-based models of residential segregation: Are
Schelling-style preference effects robust?Environment and planning. B, Planning
&d e s i g n, 36(1), 149.
Gaube, V., & Remesch, A. (2013).Impact of urban planning on household’s residential
decisions: An agent-based simulation model for Vienna.Environmental Modelling
& Software, 45, 92–103.
Geanakoplos, J., Axtell, R., Farmer, J. D., Howitt, P., Conlee, B., Goldstein, J., Hendrey,
M., Palmer, N. M., & Yang, C.-Y. (2012). Getting at systemic risk via an
agent-basedmodelofthehousingmarket. The American Economic Review, 102(3),
53–58.
Genesove,D.,&Mayer,C.(2001). Lossaversionandsellerbehavior:Evidencefromthe
housing market.The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1233 —1260.
Gilbert, N., Hawksworth, J. C., & Swinney, P. A. (2009).An agent-based model of the
Englishhousingmarket.. AAAI Spring symposium: Technosocial predictive analytics.
(pp. 30–35).
Glaeser, E. L., Kahn, M. E., & Rappaport, J. (2008).Why do the poor live in cities? The
role of public transportation.Journal of urban Economics, 63(1), 1–24.
Gode,D.K.,&Sunder,S.(1993). Allocativeeﬃciencyofmarketswithzero-intelligence
traders:Marketasapartialsubstituteforindividualrationality. Journal of political
economy, 119–137.
Goodman, A. C. (1978).Hedonic prices, price indices and housing markets.Journal of
Urban Economics, 5(4), 471–484.
Grimm, V., Berger, U., DeAngelis, D. L., Polhill, J. G., Giske, J., & Railsback, S. F. (2010).
The ODD protocol: A review and ﬁrst update. Ecological Modelling , 221(23),
2760–2768.
Haase, D., Lautenbach, S., & Seppelt, R. (2010). Modeling and simulating residen-
tial mobility in a shrinking city using an agent-based approach.Environmental
Modelling & Software, 25(10), 1225–1240.
Huang, Q., Parker, D. C., Filatova, T., & Sun, S. (2014).A review of urban residential
choice models using agent-based modeling.Environment and Planning B Planning
and Design,
Husslage, B. G., Rennen, G., van Dam, E. R., & den Hertog, D. (2011).Space-ﬁlling
latin hypercube designs for computer experiments.Optimization and Engineering,
12(4), 611–630.
Iacoviello, M. (2005).House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the
business cycle.The American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764.
Index, S. C.-S. H. P. (2013).S&P Case-Shiller home price index.Accessed: 2013-11-12
Kindleberger,C.(1987). InJ.Eatwell,M.Milgate,&P.Newman(Eds.), Bubbles, the new
palgrave: A dictionary of economics. New York: Stockton Press.
Krugman, P. (2005).Greenspan and the bubble.The New York Times, 29(8), 2005.
Krugman, P. (2009).How did economists get it so wrong?New York Times, 6(09),
Kuminoff, N. V., Smith, V. K., & Timmins, C. (2013).The new economics of equilib-
rium sorting and policy evaluation using housing markets.Journal of Economic
Literature, 51(4), 1007 —1062.
Ligmann-Zielinska,A.(2009). Theimpactofrisk-takingattitudesonalandusepattern:
An agent-based model of residential development.Journal of Land Use Science ,
4(4), 215–232.
Magliocca,N.,Saﬁrova,E.,McConnell,V.,&Walls,M.(2011). Aneconomicagent-based
model of coupled housing and land markets (CHALMS).Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems, 35(3), 183—19 1.
Merlo, A., & Ortalo-Magn, F. (2004).Bargaining over residential real estate: Evidence
from England.Journal of Urban Economics, 56(2), 192–216.
Ortalo-Magne, F., & Rady, S. (2006).Housing market dynamics: On the contribution
of income shocks and credit constraints.The Review of Economic Studies, 73(2),
459—48 5.
Owusu-Ansah, A., Roberts, D., Schulz, R., & Wersing, M. (2013).Developing a local
house price index: The case of Aberdeen, Scotland.
Palm, R. (1978).Spatial segmentation of the urban housing market.Economic Geogra-
phy, 210–221.
Parker, D. C., Brown, D. G., Filatova, T., Riolo, R., Robinson, D. T., & Sun, S. (2012).Do
land markets matter? A modeling ontology and experimental design to test the
effectsoflandmarketsforanagent-basedmodelofex-urbanresidentialland-use
change. .Agent-based models of geographical systems,(pp. 525–542). Springer.
Parker,D. C.,&Filatova, T. (2008).A conceptual design forabilateral agent-based land
market with heterogeneous economic agents.Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 32(6), 454–463. GeoComputation: Modeling with spatial agents.
Pearson, N. (2016).Foreign buying plummets in vancouver after New property tax,
bloomberg markets.
Polhill, J. G., Parker, D. C., & Gotts, N. M. (2007).Effects of land markets on competi-
tionbetweeninnovatorsandimitatorsinlanduse:ResultsfromFEARLUS-ELMM.
Social simulation: Technologies, advances and new discoveries, 81–97.
Poterba, J. M. (1984). Tax subsidies to owner-occupied housing: an asset-market
approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4), 729— 752.
Rosenthal, S. S. (2008).Old homes, externalities, and poor neighborhoods. a model of
urban decline and renewal.Journal of Urban Economics, 63(3), 816–840.
Silos, P. (2007).Housing, portfolio choice and the macroeconomy.Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 31(8), 2774—2 801.
Sommervoll, D. E., Borgersen, T.-A., & Wennemo, T. (2010). Endogenous housing
market cycles.Journal Of Banking & Finance, 34(3), 557—56 7.
Stein, J. C. (1995).Prices and trading volume in the housing market: A model with
down-payment effects.The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2), 379–406.
Stuart, S. (2004). 2004 CEO study: A statistical snapshot of leading CEOs,Accessed:
2016-11-08
Sunder, S. (2003). Markets as artifacts: Aggregate eﬃciency from zero-intelligence
traders.
Torrens,P.M.,&Nara,A.(2007). Modelinggentriﬁcationdynamics:Ahybridapproach.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 31(3), 337—36 1.
W u ,B . ,B i r k i n ,M . ,&R e e s ,P .( 2 0 0 8 ) .A spatial microsimulation model with student
agents. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32(6), 440—45 3.
