EVALUATION OF COLLABORATIVE FILTERING BY AGENT-BASED 
SIMULATION CONSIDERING MARKET ENVIRONMENT 
 
Takashi Umeda 
Tokyo Institute of Technology 
   umeda,ichikawa@cs.dis.titech.ac.jp 
 
Manabu Ichikawa 
Tokyo Institute of Technology 
 
Yuhsuke Koyama 
Tokyo Institute of Technology 
 
Hiroshi Deguchi 
Tokyo Institute of Technology 
   koyama,deguchi@dis.titech.ac.jp  
 
METHODOLOGY OF THIS RESEARCH ABSTRACT 
  
Recommendation algorithms are usually evaluated by 
cross-validation or human-subject experiments. 
We propose a new evaluation approach for collaborative 
filtering, a kind of recommendation algorithm through 
agent-based simulation. We modeled a virtual E-commerce 
market where we evaluated the collaborative filtering 
algorithm. Our findings were as follows: 1) the number of 
neighbors is a key parameter and there is a trade-off due to 
market circumstances, 2) a bigger number of neighbors 
performed better, with a tendency that was independent of the 
degree of clustering of consumer preferences, 3) if there were 
any high-frequency purchasers, a smaller number of 
neighbors performed better. 
In cross-validation (Sarwar 2001), data is divided into a 
test portion and a training portion and researchers measure the 
error between the test data and the estimated values computed 
with the training portion. This method is convenient to use 
when there is sufficient available data. However, it is difficult 
to evaluate the recommendation algorithms considering the 
market environment in cases where consumer behavior is very 
complex in accordance with thei r attributes, characteristics, 
and taste in items. It is even impossible to use this method 
when the market environmen t changes frequently, for 
example, new items are dynamically and constantly added and 
consumer preferences dynamical ly change according to the 
website recommendations. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Electronic-commerce (EC) websites have been increasing 
in number and market size around the world. In 2007, Japan’s 
business to consumer EC market size amounted to 5.3 trillion 
yen (Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry 2008). Some EC 
websites employ a system for recommending items to 
consumers, but these systems might not be working 
effectively. To optimize the system parameters, we need some 
virtual evaluation environments. 
A human-subject experiment (Zhang 2002) is a good 
approach for evaluating algor ithms considering the market 
environment. However, an experimental trial takes a long time 
and it is not easy to attract many subjects. 
Consequently, an appropriate evaluation method is 
needed. We propose a new evaluation method, an agent-based 
simulation (ABS). The ABS method has the advantage of 
modeling agent heterogeneity and the interaction among 
agents. We created a model containing recommendation 
algorithms, consumer decision-making algorithms, item 
characteristics, and their rela tion to consumer preferences.  
This model is able to estimate the optimal parameter settings 
in the algorithms and the accuracy of recommendations 
considering the market envi ronment and changes in the 
environment. Furthermore, in cases where it is difficult to 
obtain past purchase data, researchers can easily evaluate the 
recommendation algorithms under various assumptions. Table 
1 summarizes the characteristics of the evaluation 
methodologies. 
In this paper, we propose a simulation model for 
evaluating and designing recommendation algorithms 
considering the market environment. This model is a business 
simulation able to provide useful knowledge for people 
engaged in web marketing, web systems or EC business. As 
an application of the model, evaluation and parameter 
optimization is performed for a us er-based approach that is a 
kind of collaborative filtering algorithm, the popular 
recommendation algorithm used on many websites. 
 
 
214 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

RELATED WORK 
 
RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 
 In this section, we briefly present some of the research 
related to information filtering and recommender systems. 
Recommender systems can be broadly categorized into two 
types: content-based filtering and collaborative filtering. In 
content-based filtering, recommendations are made by using 
information about the item, such as the category, tag, and 
description. When using this method, additional information 
on the item must be obtained manually. So, it would be 
difficult to apply content-based filtering when there are items 
for which additional information is not supplied. In 
collaborative filtering, the recommender system uses the item 
ratings by users to generate recommendations, and it is 
typically content agnostic. So, it is advantageous to 
recommend a set of items from a large number of items 
regardless of whether or not additional information is supplied. 
The model that we propose is useful for evaluation and 
parameter optimization for collaborative filtering. 
Collaborative filtering systems can be further categorized 
into memory-based and model-based algorithms. 
memory-based algorithms generate ratings predictions for 
users based on their past ratings. In addition, the 
memory-based method is categorized into user-based 
(Resenick 1994; Herlocker 1999) and item-based (Sarwar 
2001) methods. The former is  calculated as the weighted 
average of the ratings given by other users where the weight is 
proportional to the similarity between users. The latter method 
is calculated as the weighted average of the ratings given by 
the subject user where the weight is proportional to the 
similarity between items. In contrast to memory-based 
algorithms, model-based algorithms try to model the users 
based on their past ratings and then use these models to 
predict the ratings on unseen items. Examples of this approach 
are methods using the Bayesian network (Breese 1998), LSH 
(Abhinandan 2007), probabilistic latent semantic indexing 
(pLSI) (Hofman 1999; Hofman 2004), the Markov decision 
process (Shani 2002; Shani 2005) and clustering (Breese 
1998). Both the memory-based and model-based approach are 
used for business applications, for example, on the online 
retail book store, Amazon.com (Linden 2003) and the online 
news website, Google News (Abhinandan 2007). 
Table 1  Comparison of methodologies 
 
Methodology Ease of use Market environment Changes in 
environment 
Cross-validation OK NG NG 
Human-subject experiments NG OK Depends 
ABS OK OK OK 
 
 
Figure 1 Category of recommendation  
 
 
 Our model can be applied to various approaches for the 
collaborative filtering mentioned above. In this paper, we 
focus on the “user-based approach”, which is the basic one in 
collaborative filtering algorithms. Evaluation and parameter 
optimization is performed. 
In introducing and deploying a recommender system 
using collaborative filtering, some problems have been 
pointed out, namely in terms of cold start and gray sheep. The 
cold-start problem is a pheno menon whereby the quality of 
recommendations deteriorates soon after introducing the 
recommender system due to insufficient rating data 
(Balabanovic 1997). In the gray sheep problem, the 
recommender system is unable to classify some users due to 
their unusual preferences (Burke 2002). Later, we duplicate 
the above market environmen t, and analyze these two 
problems in the user-based approach. 
 
CONSUMER BEHAVIOR ON THE E-COMMERCE 
WEBSITE 
 In economics and marketing science, research is 
conducted on consumer behavi or on E-commerce websites. 
215 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

Nelson (1970) suggests that good s can be classified as either 
search products or experience products. Search products are 
those that “the consumer can ev aluate by inspection prior to 
purchase”, for example, PC s and cameras. Experience 
products are those that “are not evaluated prior to purchase”, 
for example, books, CD/DVDs and movies. King (1994) 
found that consumers assessing a search product are more 
likely to use own-based decision-making process compared to 
consumers assessing an expe rience product, and that 
consumers evaluating an experience product rely more on 
other-based and hybrid decision-making processes compared 
to consumers assessing a search product. Furthermore, it was 
verified that recommendations for experience products were 
significantly more influential than recommendations for 
search products (Senecal 2004). 
 According to the findings of one survey, it is effective to 
make recommendations for books, software, and CD/DVDs, 
but not effective for home electronics (Hotlink 2008). 
 In this paper, we focus on recommendations using 
collaborative filtering for experience products such as books, 
CD/DVDs, movies, etc. 
Figure 3 Overview of model 
 
Figure 3 Simulation process 
 
 
MODEL 
 
 OUTLINE OF THE MODEL 
Our model contains a virtual EC website and several 
consumers (Figure 2). The EC website uses the 
recommendation system. This system records the entire 
purchasing history for every consumer and makes 
recommendations on items for each consumer. Each item sold 
on the EC website belongs to one category. Each consumer 
has a preference for each category as well as several 
parameters that are used to decide what he buys. 
In each time step, consumers are given recommendations 
on items from the EC website in accordance with their 
preferences or past recommended items and some of the 
consumers buy an item (Figure 3). 
 
216 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

ASSUMPTIONS OF THE MODEL  
 This model makes the following assumptions: A set of items bought by consumer u
 US until time t is 
defined as follows: z An item belongs to one category. An item 
cannot belong to more than two categories. 
z Items in this model ar e experience products, 
for example, books, software and movies. This 
model cannot be applied for search products 
because consumer preferences and item 
attributes in the search product market must be 
modeled differently from the case of 
experience products. 
z Recommendations are generated by 
collaborative filtering. Content-based filtering 
is not intended. 
z The category preference of each consumer is 
initially given and is not dynamically changed. 
However, customer evaluation of each item 
can be dynamically changed. 
 
ABSTRACT DEFINITION OF THE MODEL 
z Item 
A set of times is defined as follows: 
TS = {1,2,….,q } 
 
The EC website has a set of items defined as follows: 
IS = {1,2,….,l } 
 
A set of categories is defined as follows: 
CS = {1,2,…,m } 
 
Each item i
 IS belongs to a category and the category of 
an item i
 IS is defined as ICi. The number of items i 
 IS 
sold until time t is defined as soldi,t . 
 
z Consumer 
A set of consumers is defined as follows: 
US = {1,2,…., n} 
 
Consumer has a preference for each category and the 
preference of consumer u
 US for category c 
 CS is defined 
as follows: 
 
 
This value is given initially. The preference list of 
consumer u
 US is defined as follows: 
PFu = (pfu,1 pfu,2 pfu,3 ……pf u,m) 
 
The decision by consumer u
 US to buy an item at time t 
is defined as follows. “null” represents not buying an item. 
 
 
The probability that Decf ( u, t ) is an element of IS is 
represented by probu and is called “purchasing probability of 
consumer u”. In this model, the size of the purchase volume is 
represented not by the size of purchase volume per term but 
by the purchasing probability. 
BIu,t = {Decf(u,j) | j = 1,2,3,….,t } 
 
A set of items that is not bought by consumer u
 US at 
time t
 TS is defined as follows: 
 
 
z Recommendation system 
The rating value for item i by consumer u at time  t  is 
defined as follows: 
 
 
The system recommends the set of items for which the 
estimated rating is high at every term. We defined 
collaborative filtering as the recommendation method using 
not the metadata, for example, the item category, but rather 
the rating data by the consumer. Also, we distinguish 
collaborative filtering from content-based filtering. Here, the 
recommendation system performing collaborative filtering is 
defined as follows: 
 
 
CONCRETE DEFINITION OF THE MODEL 
z Recf – Recommendation model  
 In Recf, the collaborative filtering algorithm, especially 
for user-based collaborative f iltering (Herlock er 1999), is 
modeled for the recommendation model. We define wt
u, j as 
the similarity between consumer u and consumer j. wt
u,j is 
computed as follows. This is th e cosine of two vectors that 
represent the rating of items by consumer u and j. 
 
 
We define NEu,ne as the set of top-ne consumers who have 
preferences similar to consumer u. The user contained in 
NEu,ne is called the  neighbor of u and ne is the  number of 
neighbors. The estimated rating of consumer u for the 
non-purchased item i
 NIu,t ,evt
u,i , is computed as follows: 
 
The recommended items for consumer u at time t are the 
set of top-r items that have a high estimated rating value, evt
u,i . 
r and ne are operational parameters. 
 
z Decf – Decision making on what to purchase by 
consumer 
Each consumer purchases an item with probability probu 
and does not purchase an item with probability 1- probu. In the 
case of purchasing an item, each consumer selects the item 
from the non-purchased items, NIu,t. We defined evalu,t(i) as 
217 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

the evaluation value of consumer u for the item, computed as 
follows. This value is computed for all items not purchased by 
consumer u,NIu,t. 
 
w1, w2 and w3  are elements of the criteria for decision 
making on which item to buy. w1 is the degree of emphasis on 
the category of an item, w2 is the degree of emphasis on a 
recommendation from the EC website, and w3 is the degree of 
emphasis on the popularity of an item. Based on these 
evaluation values, the probability that consumer u will buy 
item i
 NIu,t at time t, Pu,t(i), is defined as follows: 
 
 
 EVALUATION METRICS FOR THE 
RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM 
In evaluating the recommendation algorithms, “precision” 
and “recall” are usually used as evaluation metrics (Herlocker 
1999). In other cases, novelty, serendipity and diversity are 
proposed as evaluation metrics (Herlocker 2004). These 
metrics are mainly used in human-subject experiments, but 
they cannot be applied for simulation-based methodology. So, 
in this research, we use “precision” for the evaluation metrics. 
Here, a set is defined in order to define the evaluation 
metrics. FIu is a set of items favored by consumer u. 
 
Precision is defined as the number of times a consumer 
expresses interest in the recommended items. Precision for 
consumer u at time t is defined as follows: 
 
 
 
SETTING OF PARAMETERS 
 
The common parameters for each market environment are 
shown in Table 2. 
 
FREQUENCY OF PURCHASING: 2 CASES 
z Homogeneous: The parameter prob called ‘probability of 
purchasing’ for each consumer agent is 0.5. 
z Heterogeneous: There are 20% “high-frequency 
purchasers” and 80% “low-frequency purchasers”. The 
parameter prob for high-frequency purchasers is 0.8 and 
that for low-frequency purchasers is 0.2. 
 
PURCHASING CRITERIA: 2 CASES 
z Preference-conscious type : The parameter ( w1,w2,w3) 
for each consumer agent is (0.9,0.1,0.0) 
z Trend-chasing type: The model contains some trends and 
trend chasers. The parameter ( w1, w2, w3) for a 
trend-chaser is (0.5,0.1,0.4 ) and that for the rest is 
(0.9,0.1,0.0). We assume that  the share of trend-chasers 
is 30%. Such agents are likely common in the retail 
Table 2  Setting of parameters 
Parameter Value 
q Time period 50
m Number of categories 10
probu Frequency of purchasing {homogeneous, heterogeneous}
(w1,w2,w3) Purchasing criteria { preference-conscious type, trend-chasing type}
 Distribution of preferences {Simple-cluster type, Multi-cluster type}
ne Number of neighbors {5,15,25,35,45}
l Number of items 2000
n Number of consumers 1000
r Number of recommended items 10
 
Figure 4 ‘Simple-cluster’ and ‘Multi-cluster’ types (numbers indicate the categories that each agent likes) 
 
218 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

music market. 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF PREFERENCES: 2 CASES 
 
z Simple-cluster type : In this case, consumer preferences 
are highly clustered. For example, there is a group 
consisting of consumer agents that like Category 1, a 
group consisting of consumer agents that like Category 
2,….as shown in Figure 4 
z Multi-cluster type: Consumer agents like two categories 
at random as shown in Figure 4. In this situation, we 
can’t cluster consumers and find similar consumers. This 
is called “Gray sheep problem” (Burke 2002). 
 
We selected four important market environments (Table 
3). In each market environment, we show the results from 
changing the value of ne (number of neighbors). Note that this 
parameter has a significant effect on the quality of 
recommendation (Balabanovic 1997). 
 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
 
EFFECT OF DISTRIBUTION OF PREFERENCES 
Figures 5 and 6 show the time evolution for the average 
precision in market environment 1 and 2 where we changed 
the number of neighbors, ne, from 5 to 45 in increments of 10. 
From these figures, we can see that precision is independent 
of ne when distribution of preferences is the simple-cluster 
type. Whereas precision is high at ne = 25, 35, and 45 when 
distribution of preferences is the multi-cluster type. It can also 
be seen from the results that when the distribution of 
preferences is the multi-cluster type, the precision value is 
lower than that when the distribution of preferences is the 
simple-cluster type.  
 
Table 3  Setting of scenarios 
Market 
environment Distribution of preferences Frequency of purchasing Purchasing criteria 
1 Simple-cluster type homogeneous preference-conscious
2 Multi-cluster type homogeneous preference-conscious
3 Simple-cluster type heterogeneous preference-conscious
4 Multi-cluster type heterogeneous preference-conscious
 
Figure 6 Market environment 1 (average precision calculated for all consumers) 
 
 
Figure 6 Market environment 2 (average precision calculated for all consumers) 
219 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

EFFECT OF FREQUENCY OF PURCHASING 
Figures 7 through 10 show the time evolution for the 
average precision in market environments 3 and 4 where we 
changed the number of neighbors, ne, from 5 to 45 in 
increments of 10. The precision in Figs. 7–9 is calculated for 
high-frequency purchasers and that in Figs. 8–10 for 
low-frequency purchasers. 
From Figures 7 and 8, we can see that the precision is 
high at ne = 5 in market environment 3. From Figs. 9 and 10, 
the precision value is high at ne = 15 in market environment 
4.  
 
Figure 9 Market environment 3 (average precision calculated for high-frequency purchasers) 
 
 
Figure 9 Market environment 3 (average precision calculated for low-frequency purchasers) 
 
 
Figure 9 Market environment 4 (average precision calculated for high-frequency purchasers) 
220 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

DISCUSSION 
From these results, we draw two important conclusions. 
The first is that the number of neighbors should be bigger in 
the basic market environment re gardless of the clustering of 
consumer preferences becaus e the collaborative filtering 
algorithms provide high quality in cases where ne is high. We 
believe that the reason for this  is that the algorithms can 
discover the similar consumer s with accuracy. The second 
conclusion is that if there ar e any high-frequency purchasers, 
the number of neighbors should be smaller than that in basic 
market environment. The reason for this is that a large number 
of ratings by low-frequency purchasers prevent the 
recommendation system from finding the neighbors when the 
number of neighbors is bigger. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
 We proposed a new evaluation approach for collaborative 
filtering, a kind of recommendation algorithm acquired 
through agent-based simulation. We modeled a virtual 
E-commerce market where we evaluated the collaborative 
filtering algorithm. Our findings were as follows: 1) the 
number of neighbors is a key parameter and there is a 
trade-off due to market circum stances, 2) a bigger number of 
neighbors performed better, with a tendency that was 
independent of the degree of clustering of consumer 
preferences, and 3) if there were any high-frequency 
purchasers, a smaller number of neighbors performed better. 
 
REFERENCES 
Figure 10 Market environment 4 (average precision calculated for low-frequency purchasers) 
 
 
Table 4 summary of results (ne* : optimal value of ne ) 
    Frequency of purchasing 
  homogeneous heterogeneous 
Simple-cluster  ------ ne* = 25,35,45 Distribution of  
preferences 
Multi-cluster ne* = 5 ne* = 15 
 
Abhinandan D.,Mayur D.,Ashutosh G.,Shyam 
R.(2007)."Google News  Personalization: Scalable 
Online Collaborative Filtering". Proc.of the 16th International 
World Wide Web Conference, 271-280 
Balabanovic, M. and 
Shoham,Y .(1997).”Fab:Content-based,collaborative 
recommendation”. Communication of the ACM, V ol.40, No.3, 
66-72 
Breese,J.S.,Heckerman,D.and Kadie,C.(1998).”Empirical analysis 
of predictive algorithms for collaborative filtering”. Proc. 14th 
Conf. on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 43-52 
Burke,R.(2002).”Hybrid recommender system: survey and 
experiments, User-Modeling and User-Adapted Interactions”. 
V ol.12, No.4,331-370 
Herlocker,J.L.,Konstan,J.A.,Borchers,A.and Riedl,J. (1999).”An 
algorithmic framework for performing collaborative filtering”. 
Proc. 22 nd Annual ACM SIGIR Conf.onResearch and 
Development in Information Retrieval, 230-237 
Herlocker,J.,Konstan,J., Terveen,L., and 
Riedl,J.(2004). ”Evaluating collaborative filtering 
recommender systems, ACM Transactions on Information 
Systems”. Vol.22, No.1, 5-53  
Hofman,T. and Puzicha,J.(1999).”Latent class models for 
collaborative filtering “, Proc. 16 th Int’l Joint Conf. on 
Artificial Inteligence, 688-963 
Hofman,T.(2004).”Latent semantic models for collaborative 
filtering”, ACM Trans. On Information systems, V ol.22, No.1, 
89-115 
Hotlink(2008).”Research about Privacy Information Protect Law 
“.http://www.hottolink.co.jp/entry160.html 
221 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009

Sarwar,B.,Karypis ,G .,Konstan.J. and Riedl,J.(2001).”Item-based 
collaborative filtering recommendation algorithms”, Proc.of 
the 10
King, M.F., Balasubramanian, S.K.(1994).”The effects of expertise, 
end goal, and product type on adoption of preference 
formation strategy”. Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, V ol.22, No.2, 146-159 
th International World Wide Web Conference, 285-295 
Senecal, S., Nantel,J.(2004).”The Influence of online product 
recommendations on consumers’ online choises”. Journal of 
Retailing, Vol.80, 159-169 
Linden,G ., Smith,B.,and York,J.(2003). ”Amazon.com 
recommendations: Item-to-Item collaborative filtering”, IEEE 
Internet Computing, V ol.4, No.1 
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (2008). ”Market research 
about E-commerce in Japan”. 
http://www.meti.go.jp/press/20080818002/20080818002.html 
Shani,G .,Brafman,R.I.and Heckerman,D.(2002).”An MDP-based 
recommender system”. Uncertaintly in Artificial Inteligence, 
V ol.18, 453-460 
Shani,G .,Heckerman,D.and Brafman,R.I.(2005).”An MDP-based 
recommender system”. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
V ol.6, 1265-1295 
Nelson, P.(1970).”Information and consumer behavior”. Journal of 
Political Economy,V ol.78,No.2,311-329 
Nelson, P. (1974).”Advertising as information”. Journal of Political 
Economy, vol.83, No.4, 729-754 
Zhang,T. and Iyengar,VS.(2002).”Recommender Systems using 
linear classifiers”. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
V ol.2, 313-334 Resenick,P.,lacovou,N.,Suchak,M.,Bergstrom,P.and 
Riedl,J.(1994). ”GroupLens:An open architecture for 
collaborative filtering of news”. Proc. Conf.on Computer 
Supported Co-operative Work, 175-186 
Appendix: The list of variables and parameters in this paper 
 
Expression Meaning 
IS A set of items 
CS A set of categories 
US A set of consumers 
soldi,t The number of items i sold until time t 
BIu,t A set of items bought by a consumer u until time t 
FIu A set of items favored by consumer u 
NIu,t A set of items that are not bought by consumer u at time t 
ICi The category of the item i 
(pfu1,pfu2,…pf um) preference list of consumer u 
Recf(u,t) The recommended item for consumer u at time t 
Decf(u,t) The item that bought by consumer u at time t 
w1 The degree of emphasizing on the category of an item 
w2 The degree of emphasizing on recommendation from the EC 
Website 
w3 The degree of emphasizing the popularity of an item 
Elements for criteria of 
decision making whether to 
buy or not 
probu Purchasing probability of consumer u 
vt
u,i The rating value for item i by  consumer u at time t 
evt
u,i The estimated rating value for item i by consumer u at time t 
wuj The similarity between consumer u and j 
ne The number of neighbors 
NEu,ne A set of the neighbors of consumer u 
m The number of categories 
l The number of items 
n The number of consumers 
 
222 | Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential Learning, V olume 36, 2009
