Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 
Nonlinear Science, and Nonequilibrium and Complex Phenomena 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chaos 
Financial power laws: Empirical evidence, models, 
and mechanisms /p82 
Thomas Lux a , ∗, Simone Alfarano b 
a Department of Economics, University of Kiel and Banco de España Chair of Computational Economics, Department of Economics, 
University Jaume I Castellón, Spain 
b Department of Economics, University Jaume I, Castellón, Spain 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received 11 January 2016 
Accepted 25 January 2016 
Available online 2 March 2016 
Keywords: 
Power laws 
Financial returns 
Leptokurtosis 
Volatility clustering 
Agent-based modeling 
a b s t r a c t 
Financial markets (share markets, foreign exchange markets and others) are all character- 
ized by a number of universal power laws. The most prominent example is the ubiquitous 
ﬁnding of a robust, approximately cubic power law characterizing the distribution of large 
returns. A similarly robust feature is long-range dependence in volatility (i.e., hyperbolic 
decline of its autocorrelation function). The recent literature adds temporal scaling of trad- 
ing volume and multi-scaling of higher moments of returns. Increasing awareness of these 
properties has recently spurred attempts at theoretical explanations of the emergence of 
these key characteristics form the market process. In principle, different types of dynamic 
processes could be responsible for these power-laws. Examples to be found in the eco- 
nomics literature include multiplicative stochastic processes as well as dynamic processes 
with multiple equilibria. Though both types of dynamics are characterized by intermittent 
behavior which occasionally generates large bursts of activity, they can be based on funda- 
mentally different perceptions of the trading process. The present paper reviews both the 
analytical background of the power laws emerging from the above data generating mech- 
anisms as well as pertinent models proposed in the economics literature. 
©2 0 1 6 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
1. Introduction 
While research on power laws in income and wealth 
dates back to the nineteenth century (Pareto), the atten- 
tion on power laws in ﬁnancial data is relatively recent. 
The ﬁrst ever manifestation of power laws in ﬁnance 
can probably be found in Mandelbrot [99] followed by 
/p82 The author are thankful for many helpful comments by Claudio 
Cioﬃ, Dietrich Stauffer and Frank Westerhoff on earlier versions of the 
manuscript. Financial support from the European Union 7th Framework 
Programme under grant agreement No. 612955 during the ﬁnal revision 
of this paper is also gratefully acknowledged. 
∗ Corresponding author. Address: Olshausenstr. 40, 24118 Kiel, Ger- 
many. 
E-mail address: lux@bwl.uni-kiel.de (T. Lux). 
Eugene Fama’s elaboration (Fama [43] ) published as the 
immediately succeeding paper in the same issue of the 
Journal of Business . This breakthrough very much domi- 
nated the discussion over the next thirty(!) years or so 
with an immense number of papers dedicated to providing 
supporting or contradicting evidence for the Paretian or 
Levy stable hypothesis. While the dust has settled over 
the last decade and the power-law behavior of large price 
changes now counts as one of the most pervasive ﬁndings 
in ﬁnancial economics, it had remained the only power 
law under discussion in this are a for quite some time. 
Only recently was it joined by other candidates for 
Pareto-like behavior. By now well accepted within the 
scientiﬁc community is a second power law characterizing 
the temporal dependence structure of volatility. However 
one tries to proxy the unobservable quantity ‘volatility’ 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2016.01.020 
0960-0779/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

4 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
(most straightforwardly via the squares or absolute values 
of ﬁnancial returns), the autocorrelations of these entities 
appear to decay hyperbolically, i.e. Pareto-like. Although 
this feature is linked to the long known clustering of 
volatility in ﬁnancial markets, the fact that the depen- 
dency in the ﬂuctuations is of a long-range type had only 
been realized in the nineties. Credit for this observation is 
probably due to Ding et al. [37] , published in the Journal 
of Empirical Finance . Later on, several papers by physicists 
emphasized the power law nature of this ﬁnding and its 
potential root in complex market interactions (cf. Lux [89] ). 
The power laws in returns and in volatility seem to be in- 
timately related: none of them was ever observed without 
the other and it, therefore, seems warranted to interpret 
them as the joint essential characteristics of ﬁnancial 
data. 
Very recently additional power laws have entered the 
scene: transaction volume (which is strongly correlated to 
volatility) also appears to be characterized by long-range 
dependence (although it is not clear whether volatility and 
volume share the same degree of long memory). Availabil- 
ity of high- frequency tick-by-tick data has furthermore re- 
vealed other types of power-law behavior, such as a power 
law for the number of trades in the New York Stock Ex- 
change Trades and Quotes Database, cf. Plerou et al. [105] . 
Similar results are reported for the Japanese stock market, 
cf. Takayasu [118] . 
The plan of the remainder of this paper is the follow- 
ing: Section 2 gives a more formal description of the main 
ﬁnancial power laws characterizing returns and volatility 
together with a survey of pertinent literature. After having 
set the scene, we turn to explanatory models. Section 3 
deals with the so-called rational bubble model which 
emerged as a potential explanation of ﬁnancial power laws 
from the standard body of rational expectations models 
in economics. Interestingly, this approach points to multi- 
plicative stochastic processes as a type of data generating 
process with generic power-laws. This interesting property 
of the underlying process notwithstanding, the rational 
bubble model makes grossly incorrect numerical predic- 
tions about the magnitude of the exponent. In Section 4 
we, therefore, turn to more recently proposed models in 
the behavioral ﬁnance literature. From the diversity of 
available approaches and models, we try to single out the 
basic ingredients and mechanisms leading to true or at 
least apparent power laws in simulated data. Section 5 
attempts to draw some overall conclusions from the hith- 
erto available body of literature on potential explanations 
of ﬁnancial scaling laws. 
2. Empirical power laws in ﬁnance 
The modern literature in this area starts with Mandel- 
brot [99] and Fama [43] , who both proposed the so-called 
Paretian or Levy stable distributions as statistical models 
for ﬁnancial returns 1 (cotton futures were analyzed in 
1 The quantity of interest in empirical research in ﬁnancial economics is 
typically ‘returns’ deﬁned as relative (or logarithmic) price changes over 
a certain time horizon. Research on the statistical properties of returns 
started with data at weekly or monthly frequencies but has moved on 
Mandelbrot’s paper). The theoretical appeal of this fam- 
ily of distributions is its stability under aggregation. At 
the time of publication of these papers, it had already 
been known for some time that a Generalized Central 
Limit Law holds for distributions with non-convergent 
(inﬁnite) second moments: while existence of the sec- 
ond moment warrants convergence of sums of random 
variables (at least in the IID case and under weak de- 
pendence) towards the Gaussian, non-convergence of the 
variance implies convergence of the distribution of sums 
towards members of the family of Levy stable distribu- 
tions. Under this perspective, the pronounced deviation 
of histograms for ﬁnancial returns from the shape of the 
Normal distribution together with their apparent additivity 
(daily returns can be expressed as the sum of all intra- 
daily price changes) was interpreted as striking evidence 
in favor of the Levy hypothesis. The Levy distributions 
are characterized by an asymptotic power-law behavior of 
their tails with an index α (called the characteristic expo- 
nent) which implies a complementary cumulative density 
function of returns (denoted by ret in the following) which 
in the tails converges to: 
P r(| ret| > x ) ≈ x −α. (1) 
The Levy hypothesis restricts the power-law for returns 
to the admissible range of α ∈ (0 , 2) which indicates the 
mentioned non-convergence of the second moment (with 
α < 1 not even the mean would converge). Empirical esti- 
mates based upon the Levy model typically found α hov- 
ering around 1.7. 
While this result was conﬁrmed again and again 
when the parameters of the Levy laws were estimated 
themselves, other studies raised doubts in the validity of 
the Levy hypothesis by questioning the stability-under- 
aggregation property of these estimates (Hall et al., [60] ) 
or pointed to apparent convergence of sample second 
moments (Lau et al., [77] ). From the early nineties, how- 
ever, it became common practice to concentrate on the 
tail behavior of the distribution itself and estimate its 
decay parameter via conditional maximum likelihood 
without assuming a particular distributional model (Hill 
[63] ). The pertinent literature gradually converged to the 
insight of an exponent signiﬁcantly larger than 2 and 
mostly close to 3, cf. Jansen and de Vries [69] ; Lux [85] 
and Werner and Upper [126] , among others. These results 
nicely agree with estimates obtained by physicists via 
their typical log–log regression approach (Cont et al., [33] ; 
Gopikrishnan et al., [58] ). The approximate cubic form of 
the power-law of returns is by now accepted as a uni- 
versal feature of practically all types of ﬁnancial markets 
(from share markets and futures to foreign exchange and 
precious metal markets). Note that this ﬁnding implies 
rejection of the time-honored Levy hypothesis as α ≈ 3 
means that the decay of the outer part of the distribution 
is faster than allowed by this family of distributions. The 
Levy distributions might still be relevant for returns on 
venture capital and R&D investments, cf. Casault et al. 
[23] . It seems plausible that these types of very risky 
to high frequency data over time (daily and intra-daily data up to the 
highest frequencies at which all tick-by-tick changes are recorded).

T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 5 
investments could fall into a different class of distributions 
or stochastic processes with even more pronounced tails. 
It is interesting to note that the unconditional distribution 
of daily returns appears to be remarkably close to the 
Student t with 3 degrees of freedom (Fergussen and Platen 
[45] ). However, ﬁnancial returns are not identically and in- 
dependently distributed, and, thus, are better represented 
by a stochastic process (or a behavioral model) rather than 
a time-invariant distribution. 
The second type of power laws relates to the opales- 
cent concept of volatility of price ﬂuctuations. Focusing on 
absolute returns, | ret |, as one of its most frequently ana- 
lyzed manifestations, the pertinent power law applies to 
their autocovariance function: 
E [ | re t t | · | re t t−/Delta1t | ] ≈ /Delta1t −γ . (2) 
Although the precise value of γ has received less publicity 
than that of α (maybe because it is not estimated directly 
but rather via its relation to the so-called Hurst expo- 
nent or related measures (Lux and Ausloos [89] ), reported 
statistics are also remarkably uniform across time series 
with typical values around γ= 0.2–0.3 (Ding et al. [37] ; Lo- 
bato and Savin [82] ; Vandewalle and Ausloos [120] ; Van- 
dewalle and Ausloos [121] ; So [111] , Ray and Tsay [107] ). 
It is also well-known that volatility is highly correlated 
with trading volume, and long-range dependence carries 
over to volume as well (Lobato and Velasco [83] ; Rossi and 
de Magistris [108] , Galati [52] ). Fig. 1 provides an exam- 
ple for the typical behavior of ﬁnancial data, using a large 
series of daily observations for the New York Stock Ex- 
change Composite Index. The somewhat low decay param- 
eter γ= 0.14 for volatility is a consequence of ﬁtting the 
whole ensemble of autocorrelations up to lag 200 by one 
single power law. Concentrating on longer lags we would 
have obtained a larger decay parameter in line with other 
estimates. 
It is worth mentioning that recently mounting evidence 
speaks in favor of multi-scaling in the temporal dependence 
structure of ﬁnancial ﬂuctuations: rather than the simple 
scaling (power) law (2) we might indeed face a continuum 
of scaling laws for various powers of absolute returns: 
E [ | re t t | q · | re t t−/Delta1t | q ] ≈ /Delta1t −γ ( q ) . (3) 
Note that any power q of absolute returns can be in- 
terpreted as an alternative measure of volatility. With the 
multi-scaling in Eq. (3) we, thus, get a much more detailed 
picture of the temporal development of ﬁnancial ﬂuctua- 
tions, cf. Mandelbrot [100] ; Calvet and Fisher [19,20] ; Lux 
[88] , Lux and Segnon [95] . Most excitingly, a non-linear de- 
pendence of the scaling parameter γ on the power q is 
also a key characteristic of turbulent ﬂuids and has moti- 
vated the development of so-called multi-fractal models in 
statistical physics. Recent research shows that these mod- 
els provide a very versatile, yet simple framework to model 
asset returns in a parsimonious way, and they have been 
found to perform at least as good as the time-honored 
GARCH models in terms of forecasting volatility, and often 
outperform the later to some extent (cf. Calvet and Fisher 
[20] , Lux and Morales-Arias [92] , Lux et al. [93] ). 
It is worth emphasizing that the power-law behavior of 
large returns and their ﬂuctuations seem to be truly uni- 
versal and can be found without exception in all ﬁnancial 
data. This is quite in contrast to many other ‘stylized facts’ 
in economics, for example concerning macroeconomic data 
(such as GDP, inﬂation rates etc.). It should also be pointed 
out that the above power-laws are not at all esoteric con- 
cepts. Quite to the contrary, they are of tantamount prac- 
tical importance in ﬁnancial engineering: the probabilistic 
law governing large returns ( Eq. 1 ) can be applied directly 
for an assessment of the inherent risk of extreme events 
(i.e., crashes). Similarly, models covering the temporal de- 
pendence of volatility depicted in Eqs. (2) and ( 3 ) are of 
immediate practical use in predicting the future extend of 
price ﬂuctuations. 
Various authors have claimed that additional power 
laws exist in the ﬁnancial arena: Plerou et al. [105] ﬁnd 
that high-frequency data from the U.S. stock market ex- 
hibit the following regularities: trading volume (V) behaves 
like: 
P r(V > x ) ≈ x −1 . 5 , (4) 
and the number of trades (N) follows a law: 
Pr ( N > x ) ≈ x −3 . 4 . (5) 
Additional results on the distribution of inter- 
transaction times and related quantities can be found 
in several studies (e.g. Takayasu [118] ). So far, these ad- 
ditional regularities have mainly been discussed in the 
physics literature but have hardly been acknowledged by 
economists. Because of the limited number of available 
studies, it is also not clear at present whether these 
ﬁndings are of a similarly universal nature like (1)–(3). The 
only exception here is temporal dependence of transaction 
volume for which substantial statistical evidence has al- 
ready been gathered and for which pretty much the same 
pattern has been found as for absolute returns in previous 
studies (e.g. Lobato and Velasco [83] ). However, the precise 
numerical laws given in Eqs. (4) and (5) do not appear to 
be as ubiquitous like the ‘cubic’ law of returns: Farmer and 
Lillo [44] , for instance, report different behavior of these 
quantities in the London Stock Exchange, Balakrishnan 
et al. [11] also ﬁnd no time-invariant and homogeneous 
power-law behavior across stocks in the U.S. markets. 
3. Power laws in orthodox ﬁnancial economics: 
stochastic approaches and rational bubbles 
Standard textbooks on theoretical and empirical ﬁnance 
(see O’Hara [102] , for a comprehensive treatment of behav- 
ioral models, and Campbell et al. [21] for a similarly com- 
prehensive survey of empirical techniques) lack explicit en- 
tries on the power-law behavior of ﬁnancial data. It is only 
via stochastic processes with asymptotic power law behav- 
ior that they implicitly take into account the existence of 
the universal scaling laws highlighted in Section 2 . Until 
very recently, ﬁnancial power laws have, therefore, only 
been taken into account under a purely statistical perspec- 
tive. The hallmark of this literature is the (G)ARCH (Gener- 
alized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity) class 
of processes introduced in Engle [42] . GARCH essentially 
models returns as a random process with a time-varying

6 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
Fig. 1. Illustration of the main power law characteristics of ﬁnancial data. Our data are daily recordings of the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index 
over the period 1988–1998 (a total of 2782 observations). Instead of the index itself, we show its returns deﬁned as the log increments between adjacent 
trading days (upper left panel). These already show the two main ‘stylized facts’: a large number of extreme positive and negative realizations, and the 
clustering of volatility, i.e. characteristic switches between turbulent and more tranquil episodes. The power law nature of the ﬁrst feature is underlined by 
inspecting the log histogram of (absolute) returns (upper right hand). In contrast to a Normal distribution with the same variance (solid line), the triangles 
for the empirical distribution show a prolongation in the tail which in its outer part has an almost linear shape in agreement with Eq. (1) . The lower 
panels show absolute returns as a straightforward measure of volatility (left) and their autocorrelations (right). The ACF decays extremely slowly and even 
after 200 lags has signiﬁcantly positive entries (95% boundaries are demarcated by broken lines). This hyperbolic rather than exponential decay is in line 
with Eq. (2) . 
variance which shows autoregressive dependence, i.e. 
ret t = σt ε t (6) 
σ2 
t = α0 + α1 ε 2 
t−1 + βt σ2 
t−1 , 
with ε t ∼ N (0, 1). As this type of auto-correlation is 
readily apparent in any plot of a ﬁnancial time series 
(cf. Fig. 1 ), it is not too surprising that GARCH captures 
the short-run dynamics of volatility quite well. Implying 
exponential rather than hyperbolic decay of the volatility 
autocorrelations it nevertheless falls short of providing 
a stochastic process in accordance with the long mem- 
ory property depicted in Eq. (2) . However, even with a 
Gaussian distribution of the increments, the compound 
unconditional distribution resulting from (6) is character- 
ized by fat tails and hence is in accordance with Eq. (1) . 
This relatively simple statistical recipe, therefore, already 
allows to reproduce one of the universal laws of returns. 
Reﬁnements of the GARCH approach have, in fact, also 
covered the scaling in the autocovariances via imposition 
of an inﬁnite number of lags with hyperbolically decaying 
weights in the difference equation governing the volatility 
dynamics, cf. Baillie et al. [9] . 
Although these statistical models and the myriads of 
variations on this topic which have come out in the lit- 
erature are important tools in ﬁnancial engineering, they 
do not provide an avenue towards an explanation of the 
empirical regularities. In fact, until very recently, standard 
models in the theoretical literature were unable to ex- 
plain even the phenomenological aspects covered by the 
GARCH models, let alone the asymptotic laws in Eqs. (2) 
and (3) with their perplexingly precise numerical manifes- 
tation in the data. To be honest, these regularities were 
neither well-known among ﬁnancial economists nor did 
their standard models provide an easy avenue towards ex- 
planations of such power laws. 
There is one important exception though in that one 
ingredient of the received body of models, in fact, pro- 
duces power law statistics as an immediate consequence 
of its underlying model structure, which, however, has 
also been realized only very recently. This class of models 
is known as models of speculative bubbles with rational 
expectations (RE bubbles). This theory attempts to explain 
the rather obvious frequent deviation of market prices 
from their underlying fundamental value (also known as 
the ‘intrinsic’ value of an asset which is determined by 
current expectations about future earning prospects) with- 
out sacriﬁcing the ‘rationality’ assumption of traditional 
asset pricing models. 
Before proceeding to RE bubbles, let us introduce 
the standard asset pricing model of the textbook Eﬃcient

T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 7 
Market Paradigm. The starting point of this approach is the 
formula for fair or arbitrage-free valuation of an asset: 
p t = δE[ p t+1 + d t+1 | I t ] (7) 
with p t the price at time t, δ < 1 the discount factor 
reﬂecting the time preference of agents, and d t denoting 
dividends at time t . Eq. (6) says that a fair and arbitrage- 
free price should be identical to the discounted expected 
value (conditional on the current information set I t ) of 
next period’s price plus the dividend paid out in that 
period. With identical expectations of all agents, the 
equilibrium price should converge to this benchmark. 
Otherwise, agents would sell/buy as long as an inequality 
prevails between the right-hand side and left-hand side 
of Eq. (7) . Imposing a so-called ‘transversality condition’, 
lim i →∞ δi E[ p t+ i | I t ] = 0 one can replace p t+1 by the per- 
tinent arbitrage-free pricing equation at period t + 1 (of 
course, Eq. (7) has to hold in all periods). Continuing 
along these lines by further substitution of the pertinent 
equations at t + 2 , t + 3 , . . . , one obtains: 
p t = p f,t = 
∞ ∑ 
i =1 
δi E [ d t+ i | I t ] . (8) 
Eq. (8) postulates that the price should always equal the 
discounted expected future stream of dividends which is 
what is also often called the fundamental value of the 
asset, p f, t . This pricing formula can be seen as a manifesta- 
tion of the Eﬃcient Market Paradigm postulating that prices 
reﬂect all available information about the fundamental 
factors of the underlying asset in an unbiased manner and 
that they should immediately react to forthcoming new 
information about these fundamentals. It is worthwhile to 
note in passing that the traditional view of the Eﬃcient 
Market Hypothesis is not necessarily inconsistent with 
observations of power laws in ﬁnancial data since it re- 
mains agnostic about the structure of the ‘news process’ 
driving returns. However, it would have to attribute their 
origin entirely to exogenous factors: all power laws would 
have to be explained by fundamental valuation factors, 
E[ d t+ i | I t ] , exhibiting these same characteristics which are 
then reproduced by price changes reﬂecting changes in 
fundamentals. Unfortunately, ‘fundamentals’ are essentially 
unobservable and cover a bundle of diverse factors such 
as ﬁrm-speciﬁc events, political inﬂuences etc. 
As pointed out by Blanchard and Watson [13] it re- 
quires only a minor modiﬁcation of the above assumption, 
to allow for deviations of prices from fundamental values. 
Namely, though mathematically convenient, the ‘transver- 
sality condition’ needed to proceed from (7) to (8) is by no 
means necessary from a theoretical perspective. Dropping 
it, however, opens a Pandora’s box of possible asset price 
paths deviating from fundamental valuation. Blanchard and 
Watson [13] ﬁrst remarked that without the transversality 
condition, Eq. (7) does not necessarily exclude per se such 
weird phenomena like speculative overvaluation and sub- 
sequent crashes. Quite the opposite, it allows the price to 
contain a bubble component B t by which it deviates from 
the fundamental value p f, t : 
p t = p f,t + B t . (9) 
Earlier literature had avoided this possibility by assuming 
B t = 0 . Nevertheless, this framework is still far away from 
an agnostic view of “anything goes” in ﬁnancial markets. 
Rather, the rational expectations assumption in Eq. (7) still 
poses heavy restrictions on admissible bubble dynamics. In 
particular, only those bubbles are allowed which satisfy: 
B t = δE[ B t+1 | I t ] , (10) 
as otherwise e.g. (7) would not hold. 
A fairly general class of processes obeying (10) can be 
written as: 
B t = a t B t−1 + ε t (11) 
with at a t ∈ A = { a 1 , a 2 , . . . , a n } occurring with probabilities 
π1 , π2 , ..., πn and ε t IID with mean zero. The only ad- 
ditional restriction which the a i have to meet is E[ a t ] = 
n ∑ 
i =1 
πi a i = 1 
δ in order to be in harmony with (10). With both 
a t and ε t stochastic variables, the bubble process (11) is a 
so-called multiplicative stochastic process . This kind of ran- 
dom difference equation had already been studied com- 
prehensively in Kesten [72] who showed that multiplica- 
tive processes are generic power-law generators . 2 . He also 
showed that the power-law exponent for the unconditional 
distribution of the underlying dynamic variable can be pre- 
cisely determined from the distribution of the multiplica- 
tive component. In our notation, the power-law applies to 
deviations from the fundamental value (B t ) : P rob(| B t | > 
x ) ∼ x −μ with μ given by: 
E[ | a t | μ] = 1 . (12) 
Fig. 2 a and b shows an illustration of the resulting time 
series and the distribution of B t which, of course, agrees 
with the theoretical result. Lux and Sornette [96] show 
that the power-law in the bubble component carries over 
directly to price changes and also dominates the distribu- 
tion of returns. 
What generates the power-law tails of the bubble 
model? Since the mean value of a t is 1/ δ > 1, the set A has 
to include at least one element larger than unity (typically, 
the smallest a i would be set to zero to allow for the possi- 
bility of a total crash of the bubble). Hence, the realizations 
of a i will switch between values smaller and larger than 
one. In a deterministic setting, the former would guarantee 
convergence towards B ∞ = 0 while the later would yield 
an explosive dynamics (which would ensue also if we only 
allow for one single a t = 1 /δ > 1 ). The time-variation of 
a t , then, generates an intermittent ampliﬁcation of ﬂuctu- 
ations which, however, only continues as long as it is not 
interrupted by realizations of a t < 1 (cf. Fig. 2 for an ex- 
ample). It is remarkable that, in general, the additive noise 
component, ε t , has no inﬂuence at all on the emerging 
power-law exponent μ which is fully determined by the 
distribution of a t . This means that the resulting exponent 
2 This is true under very mild conditions on the structure of the ran- 
dom difference equation. A glance at the additional conditions stated in 
Kesten’s theorem, in fact, shows that they will only be violated by very 
particular processes, cf. Lux and Sornette [96] . It is worthwhile to note 
that GARCH and other phenomenological models of time-varying volatil- 
ity dynamics can also be interpreted as multiplicative stochastic processes 
(cf. de Haan et al. [36] )

8 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
Fig. 2. Example of a RE bubble process with A = {0, 0.9, 1.3} occurring with probabilities π(0) = 0 . 1 , π(0 . 9) = 0 . 4 and π(1 . 3) = 0 . 5 , and additive stochastic 
component ε t following a Normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation 0.1. The simulation illustrates how this framework generates repeated 
outbreaks of bubbles (periods of deviations form the fundamental values) which all end in crashes leading to a reversal of the price to its fundamental 
value. The inlet shows a loglog plot of the inverse of the cumulative distribution function of price changes from the same RE bubble process. The theoretical 
(exact!) power-law index can be calculated from Eq. (12) . With a simulation over 10 6 time steps, the resulting μ = 0 . 92 (for a discount rate δ = 0 . 99 ) can 
be nicely observed over at least four orders of magnitude. The slight deviation for very large values is due to the scarcity of observations in the very far 
tails. 
μ, in fact, only reﬂects the intrinsic dynamics of rational 
speculative bubbles (the way B t depends on B t−1 ) while in 
a sense external factors represented by ε t as well as the 
fundamental factors affecting the component p f, t in the as- 
set price given by Eq. (9) have only a very subordinate role. 
Eq. (11) with arbitrary distributions of its multiplica- 
tive and additive components, a t and ε t , is a multiplica- 
tive stochastic difference equation in its most general form. 
The only restriction on multiplicative processes that could 
be used as rational bubble processes in a ﬁnance setting 
is, therefore, the restriction stemming for the assumption 
of rationality or consistency of expectations (i.e., all agents 
have correct expectations about both the future develop- 
ment of the bubble as well as the fundamental compo- 
nent of the asset price): E[ a t ] = 1 /δ > 1 . Unfortunately, as 
pointed out by Lux and Sornette [96] , it is exactly this 
requirement which restricts the admissible range of out- 
comes to μ < 1 - far off from the empirical ﬁndings of an 
exponent around three. The important consequence is that 
this simple and appealing theory of rational bubbles rather 
than being in harmony with empirical power-laws pro- 
duces results that are at odds with empirical observations. 
Since this result applies to the entire class of RE bubble 
models, it seems that economists have to accept deviations 
from the ideal case of perfect rationality in order to explain 
fat tails and clustered volatility. Furthermore, the assump- 
tion of ‘rational expectations’ in economic models has pro- 
voked mounting criticism as it requires a capacity of com- 
putation and information processing of agents far beyond 
imagination and immense effort s have been devoted re- 
cently to introduce boundedly rational behavior into eco- 
nomic models, cf. Brenner [15] . It is also worthwhile to 
note that ‘rationality’ of expectations can be tested em- 
pirically and there exists a large body of such tests whose 
overall outcome is that rational expectations can be ‘over- 
whelmingly rejected’ (cf. MacDonald [97] ). 
4. Multi-agent models in behavioral ﬁnance 
4.1. Overview 
Although the rational bubble theory can be viewed as a 
generic power-law generator, it might appear inappropriate 
in more than one way. First, as we have seen, it generates 
power-laws which are deﬁnitely at odds with the empirical 
ones - and hence the perspective of analyzing scaling be- 
havior, in fact, shows the limitations of this approach. Sec- 
ond, it shares the conceptual problems of economic mod- 
els with ‘fully’ rational agents. As Mark Buchanan puts it: 
“To anyone who is not an economist, the orthodox per- 
spective that sees people as rational agents who always 
work out their rational self-interests and act on them, 
seems more than a little peculiar” (Buchanan [18] ). Clearly, 
the ‘full rationality’ assumption appears much too strong 
a statement in the eyes of the layman and seems to be 
in so striking contrast to observed real-life behavior to 
let it appear almost ridiculous for those who have not 
been brought up in this tradition. Although there might be 
good reasons to use the rationality postulate when tackling 
certain questions 3 and although the question of rational 
vs. non-rational expectations might be of minor concern 
for various economic problems, modeling economic phe- 
nomena governed by not-fully-rational behavior requires a 
3 Think of analyses of future effects of ﬁscal or monetary policy mea- 
sures: a rational expectations framework allows to single out their purely 
intrinsic effects without mingling them with problems of misperceptions 
of agents of the economic environment.

T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 9 
different approach. This is surely the case with ﬁnancial 
markets for which it has been observed that their immense 
trading volume already raises doubts about common ra- 
tionality and knowledge of such rationality on the part 
of other agents (Leroy [79] ). Survey studies conﬁrm that 
market participants themselves attribute a large portion of 
price ﬂuctuations to bandwagon effects, overreaction and 
speculative dynamics (Cheung and Wong [29] ). The re- 
cently mounting literature on experimental asset markets 
adds credibility to this view by showing that human sub- 
jects typically produce price bubbles and crashes even in 
simple laboratory markets (this by now immense literature 
got started by Smith et al. [110] and has recently been sur- 
veyed by Palan [104] ). 
From the power-law perspective, the universal cubic 
law of price returns and the long-range correlations of 
volatility suggest to view ﬁnancial data as results of a so- 
cial process of interacting agents. Models founded on ratio- 
nal expectations including the RE bubbles theory contain 
nothing of that sort: agents themselves are typically invis- 
ible and enter via some equilibrium condition like eg. (7). 
Of course, one could add a description of the typical be- 
havior of a rational agent in this framework (the so-called 
representative agent) but this approach excludes any inter- 
action of traders and by its focus on steady state solutions 
does not provide an avenue towards replicating distribu- 
tional properties of ﬁnancial data. More recently, there- 
fore, a rapidly growing research area has purposely allowed 
for deviations from ‘rational’ behavior formalizing ﬁnancial 
markets as evolving ecologies of multi-agent populations 
of traders with diverse strategies and expectations. 
Due to the obvious diversity of trading motives and 
strategies in real markets, such an approach had always 
been virtually existent: Keynes’ famous beauty contest 
parabola of the stock market (Keynes [73] ) undoubtedly 
presupposes heterogeneous (and hence, non-rational) ex- 
pectations. Early formal models of interacting groups of 
traders can be found in Baumol [12] and Zeeman [129] . 
As has become standard in most of the subsequent lit- 
erature, these authors distinguish between two types of 
traders: the ﬁrst, so-called fundamentalists, views asset 
prices as being determined by fundamental factors alone. 
These traders would buy/sell if they consider the current 
market price to be below/above the rationally computed 
fundamental value (i.e. Eq. 8 ). The second group, mostly 
called chartists or noise traders, would rather be convinced 
that asset markets are driven by systematic trends and that 
patterns exist that could be extracted by means of regres- 
sions, moving averages or more complex procedures. Typ- 
ically a short-cut representative rule (like trend-following 
behavior) is used to introduce this second component into 
the model. The market price, then, results from the inter- 
play of the two groups and their respective demand and 
supply. 
Hibernating over the highdays of the rational expecta- 
tions paradigm, the recent literature has seen an enormous 
surge of work along the lines of these early pioneers. 4 An- 
4 In fact, the boundaries between rational and non-rational behavioral 
approaches have become extremely fuzzy. For example, an interesting re- 
other limitation had, however, to be overcome to tackle the 
stylized facts of Section 2 . Namely, the interest in economic 
models has typically been to trace out the effect of changes 
of one (exogenous) economic variable on other, endoge- 
nous variables characterizing some sort of market equi- 
librium. Even with a diverse ensemble of traders, such a 
comparative static approach is ill suited for explaining dis- 
tributional characteristics of the data. One, therefore, has 
to go beyond static models and beyond linear dynamics 
to account for power-law phenomena as important overall 
features characterizing ﬁnancial time series. First attempts 
at analyses of complex data generating processes with be- 
havioral foundations appeared in the early nineties: lead- 
ing examples are Kirman [74] , [75] and De Grauwe et al. 
[34] who propose complex models of interacting specula- 
tors and study their overall statistical characteristics. While 
they did not focus on power-laws proper (then still not 
broadly acknowledged), they both showed that their mod- 
els could mimic the random walk nature of ﬁnancial prices 
although their data generating processes were both clearly 
different from a random walk. Notably, both papers study 
what we might describe as secondary stylized facts, typi- 
cal results of certain - unsuccessful - tests of hypothesis of 
exchange rate formation, and ﬁnd results similar to those 
obtained with empirical records. 
Evidence for volatility clustering as an emergent prop- 
erty of a multi-agent model appeared ﬁrst in Grannan and 
Swindle [59] . Ramsey [106] offers a rather general per- 
spective of how a statistical description of agents’ behavior 
could give rise to time-varying moments as emergent 
macroscopic characteristics of a market. Simultaneously, 
ﬁrst attempts appeared at designing market models with 
heterogeneous autonomous agents using artiﬁcial intelli- 
gence techniques (genetic algorithms, classiﬁer systems, 
neural networks) as expectation formation mechanisms. 
Much of the early literature in this vein is preoccupied 
with analysis of convergence or not of the learning process 
of agents to homogeneous rational expectations equilibria 
(Arthur et al. [8] ; Chen and Yeh [27] ; Arifovic [7] ). It 
took a while for explanations of empirical characteristics 
to become a topic in this strand of literature (LeBaron 
et al. [78] ; Chen and Yeh [27] ; Lux and Schornstein [94] ). 
Typically, some tendency towards fat tails and volatility 
clustering is observed, although numerical results are 
often far from empirical power laws. 5 
Another current emerging in the early nineties is micro- 
scopic models of ﬁnancial markets constructed along the 
lines of multi-particle systems in statistical physics. The 
ﬁrst example here is Takayasu et al. [119] . Broadly simi- 
lar approaches are Levy et al. [80] , [81] ; Bak et al. [10] and 
Cont and Bouchaud [32] . Most of these contributions do 
either not focus on power-laws or generate scaling laws 
cent strand of literature analyses the implications of overconﬁdence of 
some traders and ﬁnds that this kind of misperception might even pro- 
vide an evolutionary advantage, e.g., Hirshleifer and Guo [64] . 
5 For example, in a comprehensive analysis of the seminal Santa Fe 
model of Arthur et al., Wilpert [128] observes that the decay of the auto- 
correlation of both volatility and volume is exponential rather than hy- 
perbolic. Interestingly, results become ‘better’ if one includes typical ele- 
ments of chartist/fundamentalist interaction.

10 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
different from the empirical ones. In a related approach, 
Sato and Takayasu [109] derive a multiplicative stochas- 
tic difference equation as an approximation to the dynam- 
ics of the microscopic stock market model proposed by 
Takayasu et al. [119] . Their model consists of a ﬁxed num- 
ber of dealers who set limit prices at which they are pre- 
pared to buy or sell stocks. These thresholds are then mod- 
iﬁed dynamically in reaction to past price trends. Trades 
occur when the difference between the maximum buy 
price and the minimum sell price is positive. The mar- 
ket price is recorded as the average between the marginal 
bid and ask. Since traders are assumed to follow the ten- 
dency of the market with their reservation prices, a self- 
amplifying mechanism comes into play. Its approximation 
via a stochastic difference equation leads to a structure 
similar to Eq (11) . Without any further restriction, realistic 
exponents can be generated if the parameters of the model 
are appropriately chosen. Similar feedback in similar mod- 
els brought about the same result in the framework of Bak 
et al. [10] . In the following, I review in more detail three 
dominant types of behavioral models which cover a large 
part of the hitherto available literature. 
4.2. Models inspired by statistical physics 
Cont and Bouchaud’s [32] model adopts a lattice-based 
percolation framework in which clusters of agents with 
synchronized behavior are formed. Allowing the clusters to 
enter on the demand or supply side of the market (with 
identical probability a ) or to stay inactive (with probabil- 
ity 1-2a ) and adding a typical price adjustment equation 
for the reaction on imbalances between demand and sup- 
ply one gets the following dependence of returns on the 
current conﬁguration of clusters: 
ret t = 
p t − p t−1 
p t−1 
∼
∑ 
buy 
n s ·s −
∑ 
sell 
n s ·s , (13) 
with s the cluster sizes and n s the average number of clus- 
ters containing s sites on both the demand and supply side 
of the market. With this type of framework, it follows for 
small a that returns will inherit the well-known scaling 
law of the cluster size distribution which has been studied 
extensively in statistical physics. As Sornette et al. [112] put 
it in their sympathetic review of this approach: “This per- 
colation model thus applies physics knowledge collected 
over decades, instead of inventing new models for ﬁnan- 
cial ﬂuctuations.”
Despite being a known candidate for generating power- 
laws, the percolation model has its shortcomings: ﬁrst, 
in the basic variant described here it is without memory 
and, hence, unable to produce volatility correlations. Sec- 
ond, quite the opposite of multiplicative random processes, 
the percolation model is not a generic power-law mech- 
anism, it rather needs ﬁne-tuning so that the probability 
for connection of lattice sites, say q , is close to the so- 
called percolation threshold q c , a critical value above which 
an inﬁnite cluster (i.e. a cluster spanning the entire lat- 
tice) appears. What is more, the power-law emerging in 
Cont and Bouchaud’s case of inﬁnite connections between 
sites is unrealistic: it leads to a power-law index 1.5, some 
way apart from the “universal cubic law”. Finite-size ef- 
fects and variations of parameters could generate alterna- 
tive power-laws anywhere between the Levy and the Gaus- 
sian regime, but ﬁnding a cubic law would necessitate a 
particular choice of model design (e.g. q slightly above q c , 
cf. Stauffer and Penna [115] ). 
The well-known structure of percolation models in 
physics and wide-spread availability of pertinent simula- 
tion software has motivated a large number of variations 
on the Cont–Bouchaud topic. It has been shown that auto- 
correlation of volatility (and possibly of volume, too) can 
be obtained by sluggish evolution of cluster conﬁgurations 
over time, cf. Stauffer et al. [114] . Similarly, if clusters dis- 
solve or amalgamate after transactions, more realistic re- 
turn distributions can be obtained (Eguiluz and Zimmer- 
mann [41] ). Additionally, fundamental values and feedback 
from market prices have been introduced to make the 
model more realistic by Chang and Stauffer [24] . Focardi 
et al. [47] consider latent connections which only become 
active in certain times, while Iori [66] investigates an Ising- 
type lattice model with interaction between nearest neigh- 
bors, but without the group dynamics of the percolation 
approach. Other extensions include market entries and exit 
of agents (Wang et al. [124] ) on imitation between clusters 
(Makowiec et al. [98] ). Still, one of the major drawbacks 
of this whole class of models is the extreme dependence 
of the resulting power laws on carefully adjusted param- 
eters near criticality. Whether and how the market might 
self-organize towards these critical points remains unclear. 
Though sweeping a system back and forth through these 
critical states might yield an interesting perspective (see 
Stauffer and Sornette [116] ), a behavioral underpinning of 
such a mechanism is missing. Some models have combined 
elements of the percolation or Ising-type group dynamics 
with a distinction between traders with different strate- 
gies. Investigating the interaction of fundamentalists and 
boundedly rational traders prone to herding effects (mod- 
eled via ﬁeld effects in an Ising structure) Kaizoji et al. 
[70] obtain more realistic asset price dynamics than most 
models reviewed it this section before, which also are not 
restricted to particular parameter sets. However, the more 
generic reproduction of the stylized facts by models with 
heterogeneous trading strategies (see next section) sug- 
gests that this aspect of the model might be more rele- 
vant than the particular arrangement of agents along the 
lines of the Ising and other models from statistical physics. 
Kaizoji et al. [70] has nevertheless spawned a sizable liter- 
ature itself (e.g. Takaishi [117] ). 
Another recent model rooted in the statistical physics 
literature offers a very different avenue towards an expla- 
nation of ﬁnancial power laws: Gabaix et al. [51] , [50] pro- 
vide a theoretical framework in which Eqs. (1) , ( 2 ), ( 4 ) and 
( 5 ) are combined with the additional empirical observation 
of a Zipf law for the size distribution of mutual funds and 
a square root relationship between transaction volume and 
price changes ( /Delta1p ≈ V 0.5 ). In this theory, scaling of price 
changes according to the cubic law (1) results from scaling 
of transactions which in turn is a consequence of the Zip- 
ﬁan size distribution of big investors. This explanation via 
multiple transmissions of power laws between various eco- 
nomic quantities is actually quite different from all other

T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 11 
behavioral models. Since the ultimate source of ﬁnancial 
power laws in Gabaix et al. is, therefore, the (exogenous) 
Zipf distribution of large investors, this view is somewhat 
similar to the eﬃcient market hypothesis (which attributes 
the power laws to the exogenous news arrival process), 
while all other models rather view these laws as an emer- 
gent manifestation of the intrinsic dynamics of speculative 
markets. As already mentioned above, the power laws for 
price impact and trading volume have been disputed in 
subsequent literature. Farmer and Lillo [44] , for instance, 
emphasize that these regularities are not uniformly found 
for all stock markets, namely that often price impact grows 
more slowly than hypothesized by Gabaix et al., and trad- 
ing volume would not even follow a power-law distribu- 
tion in all markets. Weber amd Rosenow [125] show that 
large stock price changes cannot be explained by trading 
volume alone, but also depend on measures of liquidity of 
the pertinent market (and on the current density of limit 
orders). 
4.3. Interaction models of ﬁnancial markets 
One of the sources from which interacting agent mod- 
els have developed is incorporation of herding and conta- 
gion phenomena into economic models. A ﬁrst approach 
in this direction can be found in Kirman [74] and Kirman 
[75] who adapts a simple stochastic model for informa- 
tion transmission in ant colonies for modeling changes of 
strategies of traders in a ﬁnancial market. While the orig- 
inal set-up has ants exchanging information about the di- 
rection of food sources, the adaptation to a ﬁnancial set- 
ting replaces them by foreign exchange dealers exchanging 
information about the accurateness of chartist and funda- 
mentalist predictions of exchange rates. Agents who meet 
other traders adopt their strategy with a certain proba- 
bility, but agents may also undergo autonomous changes 
of opinion without interaction. Similar models with inter- 
personal inﬂuences have been proposed by Lux [84] , [86] , 
[87] , Lux and Marchesi [90] , [91] , Chen et al. [26] , Aoki [6] 
and Wagner [123] . 
Alfarano and Lux [1] have a stripped down version 
of an extremely parsimonious herding model which still 
appears to do the job of generating appropriate power 
laws for returns and volatility. They again assume that two 
different groups interact in the market: the well-known 
fundamentalists and a second group denoted as noise 
traders who are assumed to follow the current mood of 
the market. While the ﬁrst group simply trades on the 
base of observed mispricing (i.e. differences between price 
p and fundamental value p f ), noise traders are assumed 
to be inﬂuenced by contagion dynamics. They can be 
optimists (buyers) or pessimists (sellers) and switch be- 
tween both sides of the market with simple probabilities 
reﬂecting the inﬂuence of the majority opinion: 
prob(O → P ) = v 
N P 
N 
, prob(P → O ) = v 
N O 
N 
(14) 
with N P ( N O ) the number of pessimistic (optimistic) agents, 
υ a time-scaling parameter and N = N O + N P . Adding up 
excess demand by both fundamentalists and noise traders, 
the overall difference between demand and supply can be 
written as: 6 
ED = T F (p f − p) + T c x, x = 
N O −N p 
N 
(15) 
with T F , T C constants determining the trading volume of 
fundamentalists and noise traders (aka chartists). Assum- 
ing that market equilibrium is attained instantaneously, 
one can solve for the equilibrium price: 
p = p f + 
T c 
T f 
x. (16) 
As can be seen from (16), price changes are generated 
by both (i) exogenous inﬂow of new information about 
fundamentals ( p f ) and (ii) endogenous changes in demand 
and supply brought about via the herding mechanism (i.e. 
via changes of x ). While traditional ﬁnance models only al- 
low for the ﬁrst component (for x = 0 , we would end up 
with Eq. (8) ) and, therefore, have to trace back all features 
of returns to similar features of fundamentals, behavioral 
ﬁnance models give a role to the intrinsic dynamics of ﬁ- 
nancial markets. While this structure is similar to the RE 
bubble model ( Eq. 9 ), in contrast to rational bubbles the 
second component in Eq. (16) does not have to obey a re- 
striction for the rationality or consistency of expectations. 
As illustrated in a typical simulation in Fig. 3 , these few 
ingredients detailed above are suﬃcient to generate rela- 
tively realistic time series for returns whose distributional 
and temporal characteristics are quite close to empirical 
ﬁndings. What is the reason for this outcome? The herding 
mechanism of Eq. (14) produces a bi-modal limiting distri- 
bution for the fraction of noise traders in the two groups 
of optimistic and pessimistic traders. Most of the time, one, 
therefore encounters a majority of the noise traders on ei- 
ther the supply or demand side of the market (which goes 
along with undervaluation or overvaluation of the asset 
price). However, the stochastic nature of the process also 
leads to recurrent switches from one majority to another. 
During these periods, large swings in average opinion lead 
to an increase of volatility which will last for some time 
until a lock-in occurs again to a stable optimistic or pes- 
simistic majority. 
However, as outlined in Alfarano and Lux [1] , at least 
the temporal scaling of volatility in this model does not 
follow a true power-law. Because of the Markovian struc- 
ture of the model, no ‘true’ long-term dependence can 
exist, although standard tests are typically unable to dis- 
tinguish between the apparent power-law behavior of 
this model and true power-law behavior. Similar pre- 
asymptotic, spurious scaling might occur in the very sim- 
ilar models of Kirman [74] and Kirman and Teyssiere [76] . 
Wagner [123] shows that a more detailed statistical analy- 
sis reveals differences between volatility scaling in real-life 
markets and the behavior of these simple models. For in- 
stance, the volatility clusters within a time window are all 
of the same size in these toy models and small size clus- 
tering while observed in empirical time series is absent in 
the simulated data. 
6 Since optimistic (pessimistic) noise trader would buy (sell), their 
net contributions to excess demand simply depends on the difference 
N O −N p .

12 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
Fig. 3. Typical simulations of the models by Gaunersdorfer and Hommes (2003) and Alfarano and Lux [1] . In the ﬁrst model, the dynamics switches 
between a locally stable ﬁxed point and a locally stable limit cycle. The high noise level conceals much of the underlying regularity, but leaves the 
impression of systematic switches between turbulent and tranquil episodes. In the second model, the driving force are stochastic transitions of agents 
between trading strategies which lead to switches between high and low volatility episodes. Both models can reproduce the phenomenological appearance 
of empirical series (see Fig. 1 ) and could also give the impression of power laws under standard statistical tests. However, they do not generate power laws 
in returns and volatility strictu sensu , but only apparent scaling behavior. 
Certain reﬁnements of this approach provide simu- 
lated time series which come closer to empirical obser- 
vations. Aoki [6] consider a stochastic process of interac- 
tion of chartists and fundamentalists with entry and exit 
of traders and also achieve to derive a stochastic difference 
equation for the ensuing returns dynamics with a tail in- 
dex μ > 1. Finally, Carvalho [22] demonstrates that one can 
even do without chartist traders or similar self-reinforcing 
feedback in price formation. Even when only fundamental- 
ists are present in the market, a multiplicative noise struc- 
ture can result. Letting fundamentalists react on the differ- 
ence between market returns and changes of fundamen- 
tals, and attributing to them identical market power but 
allowing for activation of each trader with a certain prob- 
ability only, suﬃces to generate a multiplicative stochastic 
process via the probability distribution of the number of 
active traders and, hence, produces power law behavior of 
returns. 
Another extension of the simple herding dynamics pre- 
sented above is the earlier model of Lux and Marchesi [90] , 
[91] , who add transitions between noise traders and fun- 
damentalists depending on the proﬁtability of both strate- 
gies. Lux and Marchesi show that this relatively complex 
set-up could reproduce empirically realistic scaling laws 
for both returns and volatility in rather good numerical 
agreement with empirical data. Various sensitivity analyses 
also indicate that the numerical results are not very sensi- 
tive with respect to parameter variations. Furthermore, an 
analytical approximation via the Master equation frame- 
work adopted from statistical physics suggests a general 
robustness of the qualitative appearance of the dynamics. 
The characteristic switches between tranquil and volatile 
phases are triggered by recurring temporal deviations from 
an otherwise stable equilibrium in which the price is close 
to its fundamental value. The mechanism is this: in the 
neighborhood of the equilibrium, neither mispricing nor 
any detectable patterns in the price trajectories exist so 
that neither the chartist nor the fundamentalist strategy 
has an advantage. Agents, then, switch between these al- 
ternatives in a rather unsystematic manner which makes 
the population composition (in terms of strategies) fol- 
low a random walk. However, stability of the fundamen- 
tal equilibrium depends crucially on the ratio of chartists 
and fundamentalists. This is an insight from practically all 
models with chartist-fundamentalist interaction and it also 
features prominently in the Lux/Marchesi framework 7 The 
random walk in strategy space now makes the population 
sweep over this threshold every once in a while creating 
an onset of volatility. 
In fact, the deterministic approximation of the dy- 
namic system shows that one can interpret the number of 
chartists and fundamentalists as a critical parameter of a 
simpler system in which changes of this variable lead to 
movements back and forth through a Hopf bifurcation sce- 
nario. What happens ﬁts the deﬁnition of so-called on-off
intermittency in physics which describes a dynamic system 
undergoing phases of temporal (intermittent) bursts of ac- 
tivity when the variation of one dynamical variable moves 
it through the bifurcation point of the dynamic process. 
Typical examples are chaotic attractors coupled to stochas- 
tic motion or coupled oscillators (Ott and Sommerer [103] , 
Venkatamarani et al. [122] ). Time series produced in this 
literature are often perplexingly similar to the phenomeno- 
logical appearance of volatility clustering in ﬁnancial data 
7 For any combination of parameters, a threshold value can be com- 
puted for the fraction of chartists beyond which a loss of stability occurs.

T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 13 
and several fractal properties of the time series have been 
analyzed in the above papers (albeit the ones of particu- 
lar interest in ﬁnance are not discussed in this literature). 
Although no theoretical results are available so far for the 
model of Lux and Marchesi [90] , recent results on some 
simpler versions (Alfarano et al. [2] ) suggest that under 
some circumstances, interacting agent models of this type 
can generate true power laws for returns and volatility. 
Lux and Marchesi [91] argue that irrespective of the 
concrete details of the model, the indeterminateness of the 
population composition in a market equilibrium might be 
a relatively general phenomenon (because of the absence 
of proﬁtability of any trading strategy in such a steady 
state situation) and together with dependence of stability 
on the population composition, potential on–off intermit- 
tency should exist in a broad class of behavioral ﬁnance 
models. Some support for this argument is provided by Lux 
and Schornstein [94] who consider a quite different multi- 
agent design of a foreign exchange market with agents en- 
dowed with artiﬁcial intelligence (genetic algorithm learn- 
ing). They point out that a similar scenario like in Lux and 
Marchesi prevails in this framework which also generates 
behavior close to realistic power-laws in simulated data. 
Similarly, Giardina and Bouchaud [57] allow more general 
strategies than Lux/Marchesi, but also ﬁnd a random walk 
in strategy space to account for the emergence of realistic 
dynamics. 
There is one important shortcoming of these models: 
their outcome usually depends in a sensitive way on the 
system size (i.e., the number of agents operating in the 
market). With the increase of the size of the population, 
the nice dynamic features and power-law statistics get lost 
(Egenter et al. [40] ). The reason is that with an increasing 
number of autonomous agents, a law of large numbers 
comes into play and the stochastic dynamics effectively 
becomes equivalent to draws from a Normal distribution. 
However, Alfarano et al. [3] and Irle et al. [67] show that 
size-dependency might be a consequence of the exact 
topology of agents’ interaction. In particular, assuming a 
given intensity of interaction of agents with their neigh- 
bors (or with a general ﬁeld effect generated by the 
overall average of the population) implies that with varia- 
tion of the number of agents (the system size), the relative 
strength of this component will be declining. Scaling the 
interaction component in a way to increase along with 
system size will conserve the interesting dynamics and 
make the qualitative outcome independent of the number 
of agents. The increase of the velocity of transmission of 
information with modern means of communication might 
provide a rationale supporting an increase of the range 
of interactions. Alfarano and Milakovi ´c [4] have proposed 
an alternative solution to the system size dependence 
in the herding-type models by introducing a particular 
hierarchical structure among the market participants. 
Many variations of similar models have meanwhile 
been published that generate realistic time series (e.g., 
Horst and Rothe [65] , Ghoulmie et al. [56] , Duarte Queirós 
et al. [38] ). More recent literature has also turned to rig- 
orous econometric estimation of the parameters of such 
agent-based models (cf. Jang [68] , Chen and Lux [28] , 
Ghonghadze and Lux [55] ). 
4.4. Another mechanism: switching between predictors 
and attractors 
A closely related approach has emerged from an adap- 
tation of the seminal random utility framework for em- 
pirical analysis of discrete choice problems 8 (Manski and 
McFadden [101] ) for formalizing - again - the interplay of 
the notorious chartists and fundamentalists in speculative 
markets. This approach dates back to Brock and Hommes 
[16,17] but its potential to generate realistic time series has 
only been revealed in subsequent research. Models of this 
type are very close in terms of economic intuition to those 
reviewed in the previous section, but have a somewhat dif- 
ferent ﬂavor from a dynamic systems perspective. 
Let us illustrate the basic ingredients of these mod- 
els via an example along the lines of Gaunersdorfer and 
Hommes [53] , [54] . Our starting point is the distinction 
between different groups of traders (mostly two) whose 
excess demand for a risky asset depends on their group- 
speciﬁc expectation of future price increases and divi- 
dends: 
ED i,t = 
E i,t [ p t+1 + d t+1 − (1 + r) p t ] 
μσ2 (17) 
with ED i, t : demand of group i at time t, p t : the price, d t : 
the dividend, r : the risk-free rate available for a riskless as- 
set (i.e. government bonds), μ: a parameter of risk aver- 
sion, and σ2 the variance of the expectation term in the 
numerator. Eq. (17) , therefore, formalizes demand depend- 
ing on the risk-adjusted excess returns (the sum of divi- 
dends and capital gains) of a risky over a riskless invest- 
ment. Economists know that this kind of demand function 
can be derived from simple mean-variance utility func- 
tions as well as from negative exponential utility func- 
tions under a few additional conditions. With some effort, 
the more phenomenological excess demand function of the 
previous chapter could also be cast into such a framework. 
If there is no additional inﬂow of assets (no new issues for 
the time being), market equilibrium simply requires that: 
∑ 
i 
n i,t ED i,t = 0 , (18) 
with n i, t the fraction of market participants subscribing to 
strategy i at time t . Allowing only for agents who compute 
in a perfectly rational way the expectation of future price 
and dividend according to Eq. (7) , we would once more 
fall back on the fundamental price of Eq. (8) . However, in- 
troducing ‘boundedly rational’ speculative strategies devi- 
ations from this fundamental valuation become possible. 
As an example, Gaunersdorfer and Hommes [54] analyze 
a model with two groups, i = 1 , 2 , using different expecta- 
tion formation rules: 
E 1 ,t [ p t+1 ] = p f + v (p t−1 − p f ) , (19) 
E 2 ,t [ p t+1 ] = p t−1 + γ (p t−1 − p t−2 ) , 
together with stationary expectations of dividends 
E 1 ,t [ d t+1 ] = E 2 ,t [ d t+1 ] = ¯d . Clearly, group 1 can be iden- 
tiﬁed as a fundamentalist crowd while group 2 has a 
8 For example, choosing the preferred one from two or more brands of 
whiskey.

14 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
chartist prediction technique. The discrete choice frame- 
work comes into play when modeling the choice of one 
of these two predictors by the agents in the market. 
Like in Lux/Marchesi, choice of strategies is governed by 
objective economic factors. Gaunersdorfer and Hommes 
use accumulated proﬁts: 
πi,t = R t ·ED i,t−1 + ρπi,t−1 (20) 
where R t is the actual return achieved with investment in 
the period before and ρ is a parameter for the memory 
of past proﬁtability. Other papers use risk-adjusted proﬁts 
or utility measures instead of monetary proﬁts as ﬁtness 
criteria. However, it does not appear from the available lit- 
erature that these choices would lead to grossly different 
outcomes. The last step is predictor choice based on the 
ﬁtness criterion: 
n i,t+1 = 
exp (βπi,t ) 
∑ 
i 
exp (βπi,t ) 
(21) 
i.e. through the standard discrete choice formalization. β is 
called the intensity of choice with the extreme cases β = 0 
( β → ∞ ) leading to constant fractions equal to 0.5 or to- 
tal polarization (one n i,t = 1 , all others equal to zero if the 
slightest differences in ﬁtness exist). Often, as in Gauners- 
dorfer and Hommes [54] , additional factors enter the de- 
termination of fractions n i, t . 
Formally, the combined dynamics of predictor choice 
and price development make up a discrete deterministic 
system (in the above example it is a difference equation 
system of order three). Typically one would be able to 
derive analytical results concerning the number of possi- 
ble equilibria, local stability conditions and bifurcations of 
the system dynamics. Because of the highly non-linear na- 
ture of these systems, many kinds of complex dynamics 
can arise: limit cycles, chaotic dynamics, homoclinic or- 
bits as well as co-existence of different types of attractors 
may all happen for different sets of parameters. The later 
scenario is of particular interest and can be characterized 
as another type of ‘intermittend dynamic behavior’: when 
two or more attractors exist for the deterministic system, 
adding noise (random shocks) superimposed on the deter- 
ministic dynamics may trigger switches between different 
basins of attraction of different limiting sets. For example, 
with coexistence of a ﬁxed point-attractor and a limit cy- 
cle, the stochastic movements between both types of dy- 
namics also goes along with switches between turbulent 
and tranquil market phases. An illustration is provided in 
Fig. 3 which exhibits a simulation of the example given 
by Gaunersdorfer and Hommes [54] . Quite intuitively plau- 
sible, the market exhibits small ﬂuctuations as long as it 
hovers within the basin of attraction of the locally stable 
ﬁxed point (where the price is equal to the fundamental 
value on average) and the majority of traders chooses a 
fundamentalist strategy, but onset of more violent ﬂuctua- 
tions occurs once it traverses to the basin of the limit cycle 
(with its cyclic dynamics being governed by a prevailing 
chartist attitude). As can be seen from the resulting dy- 
namics of returns, at least for certain choices of parameter 
values, the deterministic origin of the process is almost en- 
tirely concealed by its stochastic components. As Gauners- 
dorfer and Hommes show, a number of statistics give quite 
satisfactory agreement between their simulated data and 
empirical records. Although they do not estimate power 
law indices, it seems natural from the simulated time se- 
ries that their process should be able to mimic the hyper- 
bolic decay of the returns distribution and the long-term 
dependence of volatility. 
Further examples are given by Gaunersdorfer [54] who 
has a slightly different model set-up which could even lead 
to coexisting ﬁxed points and chaotic attractors. Other re- 
cent contributions along very similar lines are Chiarella 
and He [30] , [31] , Fernandez-Rodriguez et al. [46] , West- 
erhoff [127] , De Grauwe and Grimaldi [35] , Chang [25] , 
Ke and Shi [71] , and He and Li [61] . A recent survey 
of this literature can be found in Hommes (2009). De 
Grauwe and Grimaldi [35] have an interesting variation 
of the attractors-switching avenue to intermittent ﬂuctu- 
ations: introducing transaction costs for the acquisition of 
fundamental information they obtain a band of inactivity 
of fundamentalists around the fundamental equilibrium. 
The price process, then, follows different patterns inside 
and outside of this transaction cost band which appar- 
ently also generates intermittent volatility clustering. He 
and Li [61] provide an analysis of complex dynamics of a 
continuous-time version of a market with heterogeneous 
agents switching between strategies. Both De Grauwe and 
Grimaldi and Westerhoff estimate the tail indices for large 
returns and obtain numbers in agreement with the styl- 
ized facts, i.e. numbers in the vicinity of the cubic power 
law. 
One of the distinguishing features of the above contri- 
butions is the assumption of an inﬁnite population of spec- 
ulators which allows to study the resulting dynamics via 
systems of deterministic difference equations derived for 
the inﬁnite population limit. While this is an approach 
very much in line with traditional economic theorizing, it 
gives these models a somewhat different ﬂavor compared 
to the ﬁnite-size multi-agent models reviewed before. In 
particular, the interplay of noise and deterministic factors 
is quite different in both approaches: while noise appears 
on the level of each individual agent in, for instance, per- 
colation models or the Lux/Marchesi model through the 
transition probabilities (eg. 14), the inherent ﬂuctuations 
of the discrete choice approach are averaged out by the 
assumption of an inﬁnite population in Gaunersdorfer and 
Hommes [54] . Thence, despite the randomness at the level 
of the agents and the use of random choice probabilities, 
Eq. (21) , for instance, leads to a deterministic dynamics 
under the assumption of an inﬁnite population. The noise 
component responsible for the switches between attractors 
has, therefore, to be superimposed on the market dynam- 
ics and enters on the level of the macroscopic system by, for 
example adding a stochastic term in the excess demand 
equation (18) . However, this implies that the noise level 
has to be relatively large to obtain the results exhibited in 
Fig. 3 . In fact, inspection of the simulations of this exam- 
ple shows that the added stochastic component in market 
excess demand is of almost the same size like fundamen- 
talists’ average excess demand (with chartists’ average ex- 
cess demand being equal to the sum of the two other com- 
ponents). In simulations with realistic time series proper- 
ties, the ‘signal-to-noise ratio’ in this model is, therefore,

T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 15 
Table 1 
Sources of power laws in ﬁnance. 
Class of models Source of power law Problems 
Exogenous explanations Traditional ﬁnance Fundamentals Fundamentals are unobservable 
Gabaix et al. [51] Zipf’s law for investment capital Neglect of behavioral roots, empirical 
validity dubious 
Endogenous explanations RE bubbles Multiplicative dynamics Unrealistic exponents 
Percolation models, e.g. Cont and 
Bouchaud [14] 
Cluster formation Power laws not robust 
Multi-agent models, e.g. Lux and 
Marchesi [90] 
Intermittent dynamics Sensitivity with respect to number of 
agents 
Discrete choice models, e.g. Gaunersdorfer 
and Hommes [54] 
Switching between attractors Sensitivity with respect to noise amplitude 
practically equal to one. With hindsight, this may be a 
necessary requirement for obtaining ‘realistic’ time series 
as a high noise factor will be required to mask the in- 
herent deterministic forces prevailing around both the ﬁx 
point equilibrium and the limit cycle regime. Since, on the 
other hand, the noise level should not be too high so to 
not totally dominate the deterministic roots of the dynam- 
ics, the variance of the added stochastic term is probably 
a central ingredient of the model. In an empirical applica- 
tion of a closely related model, Amilon [5] reported un- 
satisfactory results as many parameters of the structural 
dynamics turned out insigniﬁcant, and the residuals were 
not very different with or without the heterogeneous agent 
dynamics. More supportive results are reported by He and 
Li [62] in a model with heterogeneous expectations, but 
without switching between predictions/strategies. Franke 
and Westerhoff [4 8] , [4 9] , estimate various models of the 
heterogeneous agent classes in which it turns out that an 
element of herd behavior plays an important role in ob- 
taining a good match of the ‘stylized facts’. 
5. Conclusions 
In contrast to one recently articulated opinion (Durlauf 
[39] ) power laws in ﬁnance have never been regarded as 
curiosities. On the contrary, both the scaling of the tails of 
the distribution of returns and the long-range dependence 
of volatility are all-important to practitioners and have 
motivated a vast statistical and econometric literature. 
Much of the development of the toolbox in empirical 
ﬁnance is due to these apparently universal properties of 
ﬁnancial markets (with Engle’s family of ARCH models the 
most prominent example). It is, however, also true that 
economic theory has been altogether silent on behavioral 
roots of these regularities until very recently. Besides 
having been regarded as merely statistical ﬁndings outside 
the realm of economic theory, typically they have mostly 
been described in a more phenomenological way via the 
shape of histograms or the apparent clustering of tranquil 
and turbulent episodes. While a power-law perspective 
has already appeared in Mandelbrot’s seminal contribution 
(1963), whether the ‘stylized facts‘ can really be described 
rigorously by power laws has remained unclear until 
the nineties. By now, availability of high-frequency data 
and new analytical tools have led to a consensus of a 
relatively uniform exponent around three which seems to 
hold across markets, countries and time periods. Similarly 
homogeneous evidence is emerging for the long-range 
dependence of both volatility and volume. 
Theoretical work trying to explain these features has 
followed diverse avenues. As depicted in Table 1 we can, 
in principle, distinguish between exogenous and endoge- 
nous approaches for explaining ﬁnancial power-laws. The 
ﬁrst class has only been dealt with in passing in the main 
text: its major member is the whole body of traditional 
eﬃcient market models in ﬁnance which would have to 
attribute all time series properties of ﬁnancial returns to 
the structure of news about fundamental factors. In this 
view, scaling in returns and volatility would only mirror 
scaling in increments and ﬂuctuations of fundamental in- 
formation. Needless to say, many proponents of behavioral 
models take the unsatisfactory nature of this explanation 
as their starting point. An interesting alternative exoge- 
nous explanation can be found in the recent papers by 
Gabaix et al. [51] , [50] who derive the cubic law for re- 
turns from Zipf’s law for the capital of large investors plus 
some other ingredients. However, the empirical basis of 
this theory has already been questioned by careful anal- 
ysis of some of its ingredients. Even if it would go through 
it would leave one with an unexplained Zipf’s law for the 
wealth of investors from which the other power laws are 
derived. 
Most papers on the topic have, however, pursued a dif- 
ferent approach focusing on the intrinsic dynamics of spec- 
ulative interaction in ﬁnancial markets. The ﬁrst example 
in this second class is the RE bubble theory which, in 
fact, emerges from relaxation of a minor technical condi- 
tion of traditional present value models. Although it has 
the fascinating property of deﬁning a whole class of data- 
generating processes with generic power laws, numerically 
these laws are disappointingly far off from the empirical 
ones. The conclusion to be drawn from this result is that 
we can exclude this whole class of fully rational models of 
speculative activity. This leaves one essentially with either 
the choice of subscribing to the Eﬃcient Market Hypothe- 
sis of price formation being exclusively governed by funda- 
mentals, or resorting to one or the other brand of models 
of speculative activity with bounded rationality. Within the 
recent econophysics literature, percolation models adopted 
from statistical physics have attracted the interest of a siz- 
able number of researchers. Their disadvantage is the lack 
of robustness: the model parameters have to be ﬁne-tuned

16 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
to arrive at the required power-laws. As another drawback, 
most parameters in these models are not easy to interpret, 
so that an economic assessment of the explanatory power 
of the resulting dynamics at the critical percolation thresh- 
old is diﬃcult. 
In the behavioral ﬁnance literature, several types of 
models with interaction of different trader groups have 
been proposed. Typically, interesting time series are ob- 
tained from some kind of ‘intermittent’ dynamics. A gen- 
eral conclusion from this body of literature is that some 
kind of self-ampliﬁcation of ﬂuctuations via herd behavior 
or technical trading is necessary (and often suﬃcient) to 
generate time series which are phenomenologically close 
to empirical records. One of the more important problems 
of these models is the relationship between system size, 
deterministic forces and stochastic elements. On the one 
hand, typical simulation models often suffer from a critical 
dependence of their ‘nice’ results on the number of agents 
operating in the market. But also see Alfarano et al. [3] 
and Irle et al. [67] for avenues to overcome this problem. 
Models starting with an inﬁnite population, on the other 
hand, have to adjust the noise level in a way to counter- 
balance the deterministic core of their market dynamics. 
In this way, a sizable part of the ﬂuctuation of returns has 
to be assigned to purely stochastic (fundamental) factors, 
and the explanatory power of the intrinsic dynamics of the 
trading process almost by construction would turn out to 
be limited. 
The introduction of concepts and models from statis- 
tical physics has also evoked interesting methodological 
discussions: while physicists forcefully argue in favor of 
building simple models of interacting economic agents 
and neglecting as far as possible details which are not in 
the center of interest (cf. Stauffer [113] ), some economists 
have criticized this approach for producing models that 
are not economically insightful (Durlauf [39] ). Of course, 
parsimony is also a concern in economic modeling. How- 
ever, physicists and economists would often differ in their 
assessment of the essential model ingredients a truly par- 
simonious model should contain: while physicists would 
favor interactions, economists would traditionally prefer 
to emphasize the microeconomic foundations of agents’ 
behavior. However, having to begin with a full-ﬂetched 
microeconomic dynamic optimization approach makes 
modeling of interactions superimposed on the traditional 
microstructure an even more demanding task. It could 
also restrict the outcome by adhering to particular forms 
of utility functions, ways of information acquisition and 
information processing, trading strategies etc. The relative 
success of several simple models in explaining a good 
degree of the hitherto unexplained empirical character- 
istics of ﬁnancial data casts doubts on the paradigm of 
micro-foundations in the sense of ‘representative’ individ- 
ual optimization in economic models (which is a classical 
example of a reductionist approach). Although analysis 
of individual optimization is in no way unimportant, 
exclusively focusing on this aspect of economic life comes 
with the danger of neglecting the equally important con- 
sequences of both market-mediated and social interactions 
of market participants. 
References 
[1] Alfarano S , Lux T . A noise trader model as a generator of ap- 
parent ﬁnancial power laws and long memory. Macroecon Dyn 
2007;11(S1):80–101 . 
[2] Alfarano S , Lux T , Wagner F . Estimation of agent-based models: the 
case of an asymmetric herding model. Comput Econ 2005;26:19–
49 . 
[3] Alfarano S , Lux T , Wagner F . Time variation of higher moments 
in a ﬁnancial market with heterogeneous agents: an analytical ap- 
proach. J Econ Dyn Control 2008;32(1):101–36 . 
[4] Alfarano S , Milakovi ´c M . Network structure and n-dependence in 
agent-based herding models. J Econ Dyn Control 2004;33:78–92 . 
[5] Amilon H . Estimation of an adaptive stock market model with het- 
erogeneous agents. J Empir Finance 2008;15(2):342–62 . 
[6] Aoki M . Open models of share markets with two dominant types of 
participants. J Econ Behav Organ 2002;49:199–216 . 
[7] Arifovic J . The behavior of the exchange rate in the genetic algo- 
rithm and experimental economies. J Polit Econ 1996;104(3):510–
41 . 
[8] Arthur WB , Holland JH , LeBaron B , Palmer R , Tayler P . Asset pricing 
under endogenous expectations in an artiﬁcial stock market. Econ 
Notes 1997;26:297–330 . 
[9] Baillie R , Bollerslev T , Mikkelsen H . Fractionally integrated gen- 
eralized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. J Econometr 
1996;74(1):3–30 . 
[10] Bak P , Paczuski M , Shubik M . Price variations in a stock market 
with many agents. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 1997;246(3-4):430–53 . 
[11] Balakrishnan P , Miller J , Shankar S . Power law and evolutionary 
trends in stock markets. Econ Lett 2008;98:194–200 . 
[12] Baumol W . Speculation, proﬁtability, and stability. Rev Econ Stat 
1957;39(3):263–71 . 
[13] Blanchard O , Watson M . Bubbles, rational expectations and ﬁnancial 
markets. In: Wachtel P, editor. Crises in the Economic and Financial 
Structure. Lexington Books; 1982 . 
[14] Bouchaud J-P , Potters M . Theory of ﬁnancial risks. from statistical 
physics to risk managment. Univerity press; 20 0 0 . 
[15] Brenner T . Modelling learning in economics. E. Elgar Publication; 
1999. ISBN 9781840641349 . 
[16] Brock W , Hommes C . A rational route to randomness. Econometrica 
1997;65(5):1059–96 . 
[17] Brock W , Hommes C . Models of complexity in economics and ﬁ- 
nance. In: Hey C, Schumacher JM, Hanzon B, Praagman C, editors. 
System dynamics in economic and ﬁnancial models. Wiley; 1997 . 
[18] Buchanan M . Ubiquity: the science of history, or why the world 
is simpler than we think. Weindenfeld & Nicholson; 20 0 0. ISBN 
9780297643760 . 
[19] Calvet L , Fisher A . Forecasting multifractal volatility. J Econometr 
2001;105(1):27–58 . 
[20] Calvet L , Fisher A . How to forecast long-run volatility: regime 
switching and the estimation of multifractal processes. J Financ 
Econometr 2004;2(1):49–83 . 
[21] Campbell J , Lo A , MacKinlay A . The econometrics of ﬁnancial mar- 
kets. Princeton University Press; 1997. ISBN 9780691043012 . 
[22] Carvalho R . The dynamics of the linear random Farmer model. Int 
Symp Econ Theory Econometr 2004;14(1-4):411–30 . 
[23] Casault S , Groen A , Linton J . Examination of the behavior of R&D 
returns using a power law. Sci Public Policy 2013;40(2):219–28 . 
[24] Chang I , Stauffer D . Fundamental judgement in Cont-Bouchaud 
herding model of market ﬂuctuations. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 
1999;264(1-2):294–8 . 
[25] Chang S . A simple asset pricing model with social interactions and 
heterogeneous beliefs. J Econ Dyn Control 20 07;31(4):130 0–25 . 
[26] Chen S , Lux T , Marchesi M . Testing for nonlinear structure in an 
artiﬁcial ﬁnancial market. J Econ Behav Organ 2001;46:327–42 . 
[27] Chen S-H , Yeh C-H . On the emergent properties of artiﬁcial stock 
markets: the eﬃcient market hypothesis and the rational expecta- 
tions hypothesis. J Econ Behav Organ 2002;49(2):217–39 . 
[28] Chen Z , Lux T . Estimation of sentiment effects in ﬁnancial markets: 
a simulated method of moments approach; 2015 . FinMaP-Working 
Paper no. 37. 
[29] Cheung Y-W , Wong C-P . A survey of market practitioners’ views on 
exchange rate dynamics. J Int Econ 20 0 0;51(2):401–19 . 
[30] Chiarella C , He X-Z . Heterogeneous beliefs, risk and learning in a 
simple asset pricing model. Comput Econ 2002;19(1):95–132 . 
[31] Chiarella C , He X-Z . Dynamics of beliefs and learning un- 
der al-processes - the heterogeneous case. J Econ Dyn Control 
2003;27(3):503–31 .

T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 17 
[32] Cont R , Bouchaud J . Herd behavior and aggregate ﬂuctuations in ﬁ- 
nancial markets. Macroecon Dyn 20 0 0;4(02):170–96 . 
[33] Cont R , Potters M , Bouchaud J . Scaling in stock market data: sta- 
ble laws and beyond. In: Dubrulle B, Graner F, Sornette D, editors. 
Scale Invariance and Beyond. Centre de Physique des Houches, 7. 
Springer; 1997. p. 75–85. ISBN 978-3-540-640 0 0-4 . 
[34] De Grauwe P , Dewachter H , Embrechts M . Exchange rate theory: 
chaotic models of foreign exchange market. Blackwell; 1993. ISBN 
9780631180166 . 
[35] De Grauwe P , Grimaldi M . Exchange rate puzzles: a tale of switch- 
ing attractors. Eur Econ Rev 2006;50:1–33 . 
[36] De Haan L , Resnick S , Rootzén H , De Vries C . External behavior of 
solutions to a stochastic difference equation with applications to 
ARCH processes. Stochast Process Appl 1989;32:213–24 . 
[37] Ding Z , Granger C , Clive WJ , Engle R . A long memory prop- 
erty of stock market returns and a new model. J Empir Finance 
1993;1(1):83–106 . 
[38] Duarte Queirós S , Curado E , Nobre F . A multi-interacting- 
agent model for ﬁnancial markets. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 
2007;374(2):715–29 . 
[39] Durlauf S . Complexity and empirical economics. Econ J 
2005;115(504):F225–43 . 
[40] Egenter E , Lux T , Stauffer D . Finite-size effects in monte carlo 
simulations of two stock market models. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 
1999;268(1-2):250–6 . 
[41] Eguiluz V , Zimmermann M . Transmission of information and 
herd behavior: an application to ﬁnancial markets. Phys Rev Lett 
20 0 0;85(26):5659–62 . 
[42] Engle R . Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity with esti- 
mates of the variance of U.K. inﬂation. Econometrica 1982;50:987–
1008 . 
[43] Fama E . Mandelbrot and the stable Paretian hypothesis. J Bus 
1963;36:420–9 . 
[44] Farmer D , Lillo F . On the origin of power-law tails in price ﬂuctua- 
tions. Quant Finance 2004;4:C7–C11 . 
[45] Fergusson K , Platen E . On the distributional characterization of daily 
log-returns of a world stock index. Math Finance 2006;13:14–38 . 
[46] Fernandez-Rodriguez F , Garcia-Artiles M , Martin-Gonzalez J . A 
model of speculative behaviour with a strange attractor. Appl Math 
Finance 2002;9(3):143–61 . 
[47] Focardi S , Cincotti S , Marchesi M . Self-organization and market 
crashes. J Econ Behav Organ 2002;49(2):241–67 . 
[48] Franke R , Westerhoff F . Structural stochastic volatility in asset pric- 
ing dynamics: estimation and model contest. J Econ Dyn Control 
2012;36(8):1193–211 . 
[49] Franke R, Westerhoff F. Why a simple herding model may gener- 
ate the stylized facts of daily returns: explanation and estimation. J 
Econ Interact Coordinat, in press. 
[50] Gabaix X , Gopikrishnan P , Plerou V , Stanley E . Institutional in- 
vestors and stock market volatility. Quart J Econ 2006;121:461–504 . 
[51] Gabaix X , Gopikrishnan P , Plerou V , Stanley HE . A theory of 
power-law distributions in ﬁnancial market ﬂuctuations. Nature 
2003;36(6937):267–70 . 
[52] Galati G . Trading volumes, volatility and spreads in foreign ex- 
change markets: evidence from emerging market countries; 20 0 0 . 
BIS Working Paper No. 93. 
[53] Gaunersdorfer A . Endogenous ﬂuctuations in a simple asset pricing 
model with heterogeneous agents. J Econ Dyn Control 20 0 0;24(5- 
7):799–831 . 
[54] Gaunersdorfer A , Hommes CH . A nonlinear structural model for 
volatility clustering, in: Teyssière, G., and A. Kirman, eds. Long 
memory in economics. Springer, Berlin; 2007 . 
[55] Ghonghadze J, Lux T. Bringing an elementary agent-based model to 
the data: estimation via GMM and an application to forecasting of 
asset price volatility. Empir Finance, in press. 
[56] Ghoulmie F , Cont R , Nadal J . Heterogeneity and feedback 
in an agent-based market model. J Phys: Condens Matter 
2005;17(14):S1259–68 . 
[57] Giardina I , Bouchaud J . Bubbles, crashes and intermittency in agent 
based market models. Eur Phys J B 2003;31:421–537 . 
[58] Gopikrishnan P , Meyer M , Amaral L , Stanley H . Inverse cubic law for 
the distribution of stock price variations. Eur Phys J B 1998;3:139–
40 . 
[59] Grannan E, Swindle G. Contrarians and volatility clustering SFI 
working papers. Santa Fe Institute; 1994 . http://books.google.es/ 
books?id=-pHetgAACAAJ 
[60] Hall J , Brorsen B , Irwin S . The distribution of futures prices: a test 
of the stable paretian and mixture of normals hypotheses. J Financ 
Quant Anal 1989;24(01):105–16 . 
[61] He X-Z , Li K . Heterogeneous beliefs and adaptive behaviour 
in a continuous-time asset price model. J Econ Dyn Control 
2012;36(7):973–87 . 
[62] He X-Z , Li Y . Testing of a market fraction model and power-law be- 
haviour in the DAX 30. J Empir Finance 2015;31:1–17 . 
[63] Hill B . A simple general approach to inference about the tail of a 
distribution. Ann Stat 1975;3:1163–74 . 
[64] Hirshleifer D , Luo G . On the survival of overconﬁdent traders in a 
competitive securities market. J Financ Mark 2001;4(1):73–84 . 
[65] Horst U , Rothe C . Queuing, social interactions, and the microstruc- 
ture of ﬁnancial markets. Macroecon Dyn 2008;12(02):211–33 . 
[66] Iori G . A microsimulation of traders activity in the stock market: 
the role of heterogeneity, agents’ interactions and trade frictions. J 
Econ Behav Organ 2002;49(2):269–85 . 
[67] Irle A , Kauschke J , Lux T , Milakovi ´c M . Switching rates and 
the asymptotic behavior of herding models. Adv Complex Syst 
2011;14(3):359–76 . 
[68] Jang T . Identiﬁcation of social interaction effects in ﬁnancial data. 
Comput Econ 2013;45(2):207–38 . 
[69] Jansen DW , de Vries CG . On the frequency of large stock re- 
turns: putting booms and busts into perspective. Rev Econ Stat 
1991;73(1):18–24 . 
[70] Kaizoji T , Bornholdt S , Fujiwara Y . Dynamics of price and trad- 
ing volume in a spin model of stock markets with heterogeneous 
agents. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 2002;316:441–52 . 
[71] Ke X , Shi K . Stability and bifurcation in a simple heterogeneous as- 
set pricing model. Econ Model 2009;26(3):680–8 . 
[72] Kesten H . Random difference equations and renewal theory for 
products of random matrices. Acta Math 1973;131:207–48 . 
[73] Keynes J . The general theory of employment, interest and money. 
Macmillan; 1936 . 
[74] Kirman A . Epidemics of opinion and speculative bubbles in ﬁnan- 
cial markets. In: Taylor MP, editor. Money and ﬁnancial markets. 
Blackwell; 1991 . 
[75] Kirman A . Ants, rationality, and recruitment. Quart J Econ 
1993;108(1):137–56 . 
[76] Kirman A , Teyssiere G . Microeconomic models for long mem- 
ory in the volatility of ﬁnancial time series. Stud Nonlinear Dyn 
Econometr 2002;5(4):1–23 . 
[77] Lau A-L , Lau H-S , Wingender J . The distribution of stock re- 
turns: new evidence against the stable model. J Bus Econ Stat 
1990;8(2):217–23 . 
[78] LeBaron B , Arthur W , Palmer R . Time series properties of an artiﬁ- 
cial stock market. J Econ Dyn Control 1999;23(9-10):1487–516 . 
[79] LeRoy S . Eﬃcient capital markets and martingales. J Econ Lit 
1989;27(4):1583–621 . 
[80] Levy M , Levy H , Solomon S . A microscopic model of the stock mar- 
ket : cycles, booms, and crashes. Econ Lett 1994;45(1):103–11 . 
[81] Levy M , Levy H , Solomon S . Microscopic simulation of the stock 
market: the effect of microscopic diversity. J Phys 1995;5:1087–107 . 
[82] Lobato I , Savin N . Real and spurious long-memory properties of 
stock-market data. J Bus Econ Stat 1998;16(3):261–8 . 
[83] Lobato I , Velasco C . Long memory in stock-market trading volume. 
J Bus Econ Stat 20 0 0;18(4):410–27 . 
[84] Lux T . Herd behaviour, bubbles and crashes. Econ J 
1995;105(431):881–96 . 
[85] Lux T . The stable paretian hypothesis and the frequency of large 
returns : an examination of major German stocks. Appl Financ Econ 
1996;6(6):463–75 . 
[86] Lux T . Time variation of second moments from a noise 
trader/infection model. J Econ Dyn Control 1997;22(1):1–38 . 
[87] Lux T . The socio-economic dynamics of speculative markets: inter- 
acting agents, chaos, and the fat tails of return distributions. J Econ 
Behav Organ 1998;33(2):143–65 . 
[88] Lux T . The Markov-switching multifractal model of asset returns: 
estimation via GMM and linear forecasting of volatility. J Bus Econ 
Stat 2008;26(2):194–210 . 
[89] Lux T , Ausloos M . Market ﬂuctuations i: scaling, multiscaling and 
their possible origins. In: Bunde A, Kropp J, Schellnhuber H, edi- 
tors. The science of disasters: climate disruptions, heart attacks, and 
market crashes. Springer; 2002. ISBN 9783540413240 . 
[90] Lux T , Marchesi M . Scaling and criticality in a stochastic multi- 
agent model of a ﬁnancial market. Nature 1999;397(6719):498–500 . 
[91] Lux T , Marchesi M . Volatility clustering in ﬁnancial markets: a 
micro-simulation of interacting agents. Int J Theor Appl Finance 
20 0 0;3(4) . 
[92] Lux T , Morales-Arias L . Forecasting volatility under fractality, 
regime-switching, long memory and student-t innovations. Comput 
Stat Data Anal 2010;54(11):2676–92 .

18 T. Lux, S. Alfarano / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88 (2016) 3–18 
[93] Lux T , Morales-Arias L , Sattarhoff C . A Markov-switching mul- 
tifractal approach to forecasting realized volatility. J Forecast 
2014;33:532–41 . 
[94] Lux T , Schornstein S . Genetic learning as an explanation of stylized 
facts of foreign exchange markets. J Math Econ 2005;41(1-2):169–
96 . 
[95] Lux T , Segnon M . Multifractal models in ﬁnance: their origin, prop- 
erties, and applications. In: Chen S-H, Kaboudan M, editors. OUP 
handbook on computational economics and ﬁnance. Oxford Univer- 
sity Press (in press); 2015 . 
[96] Lux T , Sornette D . On rational bubbles and fat tails. J Money, Credit 
Banking 2002;34(3):589–610 . 
[97] MacDonald R . Expectations formation and risk in three ﬁnancial 
markets: surveying what the surveys say. J Econ Surv 20 0 0;14:69–
100 . 
[98] Makowiec D , Gnaci ´nski P , Miklaszewski W . Ampliﬁed imitation 
in percolation model of stock market. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 
2004;331(1):269–78 . 
[99] Mandelbrot B . The variation of certain speculative prices. J Bus 
1963;36:394–419 . 
[100] Mandelbrot B . A multifractal walk down wall street. Sci Am 
1999;280:70–3 . 
[101] Manski C , McFadden D . Structural analysis of discrete data with 
econometric applications. Macmillan; 1981 . 
[102] O’Hara M . Market microstructure theory. Blackwell; 1995 . 
[103] Ott E , Sommerer J . Blowout bufurcations: the occurrence of riddled 
basins and on-off intermittency. Phys Lett A 1994;188(1):39–47 . 
[104] Palan S . A review of bubbles and crashes in experimental asset mar- 
kets. J Econ Surv 2013;27(3):570–88 . 
[105] Plerou V , Gopikrishnan P , Gabaix X , Amaral L , Stanley H . Price 
ﬂuctuations, market activity and trading volume. Quant Finance 
2001;1(2):262–9 . 
[106] Ramsey J . On the existence of macro variables and of macro rela- 
tionships. J Econ Behav Organ 1996;30(3):275–99 . 
[107] Ray B , Tsay R . Long-range dependence in daily stock volatilities. J 
Bus Econ Stat 20 0 0;18(2):254–62 . 
[108] Rossi E , de Magistris P . Long memory and tail dependence in trad- 
ing volume and volatility. J Empir Finance 2013;22(1):94–112 . 
[109] Sato A-H , Takayasu H . Dynamic numerical models of stock market 
price: from microscopic determinism to macroscopic randomness. 
Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 1998;250(1-4):231–52 . 
[110] Smith V , Suchanek G , Williams A . Bubbles, crashes, and endoge- 
nous expectations in experimental spot asset markets. Economet- 
rica 1988;56:1119–51 . 
[111] So M . Long-term memory in stock market volatility. Appl Financ 
Econ 20 0 0;10(2):519–24 . 
[112] Sornette D , Stauffer D , Takayasu H . Market ﬂuctuations ii: multi- 
plicative and percolation models, size effects, and predictions. In: 
Bunde A, Kropp J, Schellnhuber H, editors. The science of disasters: 
climate disruptions, heart attacks, and market crashes. Springer; 
2002. ISBN 9783540413240 . 
[113] Stauffer D . Introduction to statistical physics outside physics. Phys 
A: Stat Mech Appl 2004;336(1-2):1–5 . 
[114] Stauffer D , De Oliveira P , Bernardes A . Monte Carlo simulation of 
volatility clustering in market model with herding. Int J Theoret 
Appl Finance 1999;2(1):83–94 . 
[115] Stauffer D , Penna T . Crossover in the Cont–Bouchaud Percolation 
model for market ﬂuctuations. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 1998;256(1- 
2):284–90 . 
[116] Stauffer D , Sornette D . Self-organized percolation model for stock 
market ﬂuctuations. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 1999;271(3-4):496–
506 . 
[117] Takaishi T . Multiple time series ising model for ﬁnancial market 
simulations. J Phys: Conf Ser 2015;574:012149 . 
[118] Takayasu H . Empirical science of ﬁnancial ﬂuctuations: the advent 
of econophysics. Springer; 2002. ISBN 9784431703167 . 
[119] Takayasu H , Miura H , Hirabayashi T , Hamada K . Statistical proper- 
ties of deterministic threshold elements - the case of market price. 
Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 1992;184(1-2):127–34 . 
[120] Vandewalle N , Ausloos M . Coherent and random sequences in ﬁ- 
nancial ﬂuctuations. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 1997;246(3-4):454–9 . 
[121] Vandewalle N , Ausloos M . Sparseness and roughness of foreign ex- 
change rates. Int J Modern Phys C 1998;9(5):711–19 . 
[122] Venkatamarani S , Antonser Jr T , Ott E , Sommerer J . On-off intermit- 
tency: power spectrum and fractal properties of time series. Phys 
D: Nonlinear Phenom 1996;96(1-4):66–99 . 
[123] Wagner F . Volatility cluster and herding. Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 
2003;322(C):607–19 . 
[124] Wang J , Yang C-X , Zhou P-L , Jin Y-D , Zhou T , Wang B-H . Evolution- 
ary percolation model of stock market with variable agent number. 
Phys A: Stat Mech Appl 2005;354:505–17 . 
[125] Weber P , Rosenow B . Large stock price changes: volume or liquid- 
ity? Quant Finance 2006;6(1):7–14 . 
[126] Werner T , Upper C . Time variation in the tail behaviour of Bund 
futures returns. Discussion Paper 25/02, Deutsche Bundesbank 
2002 . 
[127] Westerhoff F . Speculative markets and the effectiveness of price 
limits. J Econ Dyn Control 2003;28(3):493–508 . 
[128] Wilpert M . Künstliche Aktienmarktmodelle auf Basis von Classiﬁer- 
Systems. Knapp; 2004. ISBN 9783831407583 . 
[129] Zeeman E . On the unstable behaviour of stock exchanges. J Math 
Econ 1974;1(1):39–49 .
