Industrial and Corporate Change, 2023, 32, 386–432
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtac030
Advance access publication date: 13 July 2022
Original Article 
Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of 
macroprudential policy in an agent-based 
model of the UK housing market
Adrian Carro1,2, Marc Hinterschweiger3, Arzu Uluc
  3,* and J. Doyne 
Farmer2,4,5
1Banco de España, Madrid, Spain. e-mail: adrian.carro@bde.es, 2Institute for New Economic Thinking 
(INET) at the Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK., 3Bank of England, London, UK.
e-mail: marc.hinterschweiger@bankofengland.co.uk, arzu.uluc@bankofengland.co.uk, 4Mathematical 
Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. e-mail: doyne.farmer@inet.ox.ac.uk and 5Santa Fe Institute, New 
Mexico, US
*Main author for correspondence.
Abstract
We develop an agent-based model of the UK housing market to study the impact of macroprudential policy 
experiments on key housing market indicators. The heterogeneous nature of this model enables us to assess 
the effects of such experiments on the housing, rental, and mortgage markets not only in the aggregate, but 
also at the level of individual households and sub-segments, such as first-time buyers, homeowners, buy-to-
let (BTL) investors, and renters. This approach can, therefore, offer a broad picture of the disaggregated effects 
of financial stability policies. The model is calibrated using a large selection of micro-data, including data from a 
leading UK real-estate online search engine as well as loan-level regulatory data. With a series of comparative 
static exercises, we investigate the impact of (i) a hard loan-to-value limit and (ii) a soft loan-to-income limit, 
allowing for a limited share of unconstrained new mortgages. We find that, first, these experiments tend to 
mitigate the house price cycle by reducing credit availability and therefore leverage. Second, an experiment 
targeting a specific risk measure may also affect other risk metrics, thus necessitating a careful calibration 
of the policy to achieve a given reduction in risk. Third, experiments targeting the owner-occupier housing 
market can spill over to the rental sector, as a compositional shift in home ownership from owner-occupiers 
to BTL investors affects both the supply of and the demand for rental properties.
JEL classification: D1, D31, E58, G51, R21, R31
1. Introduction
Housing is an integral part of the economy. It is often the single largest asset of households and 
can substantially affect their saving and consumption decisions. In many countries, mortgage 
finance is one of the most important business lines of the financial sector. From a macroeconomic 
perspective, financial crises that are preceded by credit booms in the housing market tend to 
be associated with deeper recessions and slower recoveries ( Jordà et al., 2016). Yet a housing 
sector is often missing in canonical macroeconomic models or represented in a simplistic manner. 
Depending on the research question of interest, this may obscure important dynamics in the 
economy and may lead to misleading policy prescriptions. Furthermore, it is difficult to assess the 
effects of policy interventions on different segments of the housing market, such as renters, first-
time buyers (FTBs), home movers (HMs), and buy-to-let (BTL) investors, unless these segments 
and their corresponding dynamics are properly considered within the model.
© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press in association with Oxford University Press and the 
Industrial and Corporate Change Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 387
In this paper, we develop an agent-based model (ABM) of the housing market, which allows us 
to overcome some of these limitations and paint a more detailed picture of the different segments 
of the housing market, their dynamic properties, and their interactions with each other. We use 
the model to assess the effects of macroprudential housing policy experiments on housing and 
mortgage variables, with a particular focus on their time-series and cross-sectional behaviors. 
The model has several types of households (renters, owner-occupiers such as FTBs and HMs, 
and BTL investors) who are subject to a life cycle, which influences their propensity and ability 
to transact in the housing market. For example, a new household would typically start out by 
renting a dwelling, may buy its first property once it has saved a sufficiently large deposit, and 
it might later invest in additional properties to rent out. This allows for realistic and detailed 
housing market dynamics, including endogenous house price cycles and households whose type 
changes endogenously.
A preliminary version of this model has been previously presented in Baptista et al. (2016). 
With respect to that earlier version, this paper extends the model, analysis, and discussion in 
different directions. First, it provides a more accurate and detailed description of the model. Sec-
ond, the design of the model has been greatly improved in a number of key aspects: (i) many 
of the existing mechanisms have been enhanced, such as the demographics block, which is now 
able to preserve the shape of the age distribution; (ii) a few new mechanisms have been imple-
mented, such as age requirements for mortgage borrowing; and (iii) several model components 
less central to our research focus have been simplified or removed, such as interest payments 
on bank deposits. Third, while a large fraction of parameters were manually set—as opposed to 
empirically estimated—or even undisclosed in the earlier version, we have now implemented a 
systematic empirical estimation and calibration of the full set of model parameters. Importantly, 
this combination of model modifications and better estimation and calibration of parameters has 
led to a substantial improvement in the corresponding output, bringing it much closer to empiri-
cally observed values in multiple dimensions. Fourth and finally, we have simulated a new set of 
experiments and we include here a much more detailed analysis of results.
We calibrate the model to the UK housing market and use it to investigate the impact of 
housing tools available within the UK macroprudential framework. In the aftermath of the Global 
Financial Crisis, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) within the Bank of England (BoE) was 
formed as a macroprudential regulation authority in the UK. The FPC was granted powers to 
address risks to financial stability arising from the housing market. These powers allow the FPC to 
restrict the proportion of new mortgages by introducing limits on loan-to-value (LTV) and debt-
to-income (DTI) ratios in the owner-occupier mortgage market and LTV and interest coverage 
ratios with respect to BTL lending. The LTV tool is related to the credit risk and aims to protect 
lenders’ capital in the event of default. On the other hand, the DTI tool1 is related to direct risks to 
the financial system due to defaults resulting from unexpected decreases in income or increases 
in interest rates or indirect risks to the wider economy due to a reduction in consumption in 
order to continue servicing debts. In October 2014, the FPC introduced an LTI flow limit and an 
affordability test to insure against loosening in underwriting standards. 2 The aim of this paper 
is to investigate the potential impacts of housing tools available within UK’s macroprudential 
framework but not to evaluate the rules currently in place.
We use the model to perform a series of comparative static exercises to investigate the impact 
of two of these housing policy experiments: (i) a hard LTV limit and (ii) a soft LTI limit, allowing 
a certain share of new mortgages above this limit. We assess how these policy experiments affect 
key variables of interest, such as the number of housing transactions, LTV and LTI ratios, house 
prices, and mortgage approvals, among others. Our agent-based approach allows us to examine 
the joint distribution of multiple housing market variables of interest at the household level. We 
can therefore assess the aggregate dynamics in the UK housing market and at the same time 
identify the key drivers and the most affected sub-groups of agents at a microlevel.
1 A DTI tool applies to both borrower’s mortgage and non-mortgage debts. A loan-to-income (LTI) tool can be 
regarded as a version of a DTI tool that applies only to a borrower’s mortgage debt.
2 For further information, see www.bankofengland.co.uk/record/2014/financial-policy-committee-june-2014.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

388 A. Carro et al.
We find that, first, the housing policy experiments tend to mitigate the house price cycle by 
reducing the credit availability and, therefore, the leverage. Second, a policy experiment targeting 
a specific risk measure (e.g. lending at high LTI ratios) may also affect other risk metrics (such as 
LTV ratios). Therefore, when calibrating a policy to achieve a given desired reduction in risk, the 
effects of the policy on all risk metrics should be taken into account. Third, policy experiments 
targeting the owner-occupier housing market benefit BTL investors, who can increase the number 
of houses they own. Among owner-occupiers, FTBs are more affected than HMs, facing a more 
limited access to high-risk mortgages. These changes also spill over to the rental sector, as a 
compositional shift in home ownership from owner-occupiers to BTL investors affects both the 
supply of and the demand for rental properties.
This paper is structured as follows: the next section briefly reviews the literature in the context 
of our model. Section 3 describes the model. Section 4 sets out the validation of the model. 
Section 5 reports the results of our policy experiments. Section 6 concludes.
2. Literature Review
In the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, the implications of heterogeneity for 
macroeconomics have become a more central topic for research. For example, Kaplan 
et al. (2018) introduce a continuum of heterogeneous households in a canonical Dynamic 
Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) model to assess the transmission mechanism from 
the monetary policy to the household consumption. But several studies have high-
lighted the inherent limitations of the mainstream approach for adequately capturing 
heterogeneity and instead propose ABMs as a viable alternative (see e.g. Farmer and 
Foley, 2009 ; Fagiolo and Roventini, 2017 ; Dosi and Roventini, 2019 ; Haldane and
Turrell, 2019).
Over the last decade or so, several macroeconomic ABM “families” have been developed. 
They often assess similar questions as mainstream models, but with a stronger focus on the 
implications of heterogeneity for macroeconomic dynamics as well as on the impact on dif-
ferent types of agents. We broadly follow the grouping described in the overview article by 
Dawid and Delli Gatti (2018) . Dosi et al. (2010) have developed the “Keynes meeting Schum-
peter” family, which amalgamates features of both demand-side Keynesian economics and 
economic growth following Schumpeter. A second family is based on Complex Adaptive Triv-
ial Systems, as set out by Delli Gatti et al. (2011). Several notable extensions include Assenza 
et al. (2015), who introduce capital goods, and Caiani et al. (2016), who focus on stock–flow 
consistency. A third family of models, Java Agent-based MacroEconomic Laboratory, focuses 
also on stock–flow consistency as well as on the learning and adaptive behavior of agents 
(Seppecher et al., 2018 , 2019). Fourth, Ashraf et al. (2017)’s model explores the role that 
banks play in a network of trading firms and the effects of microprudential regulation and 
financial stability policy. The EURACE family comprises a large range of different strands, 
most importantly the Genoa branch ( Cincotti et al., 2012a) and the Bielefeld branch ( Dawid 
et al., 2012, 2014, 2019). Finally, the LAGOM model family was started by Haas and Jaeger 
(2005) to investigate the aggregate outcomes when various agents manage climate risks and 
was subsequently developed into a full-fledged macro ABM by Mandel et al. (2010) and Wolf
et al. (2013).
There also exist a large number of ABMs tailored to specific issues. We briefly summarize 
below the recent studies that are most closely linked to our research in this paper.
Many ABMs have been developed to generate nonlinearities and complex dynamics in the 
housing market. The seminal work of Geanakoplos et al. (2012) and Axtell et al. (2014) shows 
that the US housing market bubble leading to the Global Financial Crisis was due mainly to 
changes in LTV ratios rather than interest rates, using a comprehensive dataset on the housing 
market in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area. Similarly, Ge (2013) and Ge (2017) demon-
strate that weak underwriting standards may result in a housing bubble. Glavatskiy et al. (2021) 
use a large-scale ABM to model house price dynamics in the Greater Sydney region, explained 
by the household’s trend-following behavior and ability to borrow. Evans et al. (2021) use a 
spatial ABM, also of the Greater Sydney region, to analyze the effects of social and economic 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 389
factors on the agent’s decision-making behavior. A related strand of the literature, represented by
Parker and Filatova (2008), Huang et al. (2013), and Filatova (2015), combines spatial housing 
ABMs with land-use models.
There are also several ABMs developed for the analysis of macroprudential housing policies. 
Based on Baptista et al. (2016), the studies of Méro and Vág ́o (2018), Cokayne (2019), and 
Catapano et al. (2021) develop ABMs of the Hungarian, Danish, and Italian housing markets, 
respectively, and perform various macroprudential policy experiments. Laliotis et al. (2020) cre-
ate an ABM for countries of the euro area to assess the effects of LTV limits. Ozel et al. (2019) 
incorporate a housing market in the EURACE model mentioned above and apply a household 
net worth target and debt-service-to-income limit to determine the impact on macroeconomic 
performance. Yun and Moon (2020) apply LTV and DTI policy experiments to an ABM of the 
Korean housing market.
Another focus of housing ABMs is inequality. Pangallo et al. (2019) develop a spatial ABM 
to study the relationship between income inequality and house prices. Guerrero (2020) assesses 
the role of the decentralized nature of housing market transactions for the distribution of hous-
ing wealth in a one-to-one scale model of all households in the UK. Building on Baptista et al.
(2016), Tarne et al. (2021) investigate the link between household debt, wealth inequality, and 
consumption volatility across the housing market cycle and which macroprudential tools are 
most effective in improving these macroeconomic outcomes.
Building upon Geanakoplos et al. (2012) and Axtell et al. (2014), this paper contributes to 
the literature by expanding the existing housing ABMs along different dimensions. Most impor-
tantly, a combination of three key features set our model apart from previous contributions, 
including these two seminal works. First, we introduce a realistic life-cycle dynamics, including 
death, inheritance, and plausible income trajectories, allowing us to better match the distribution 
of several variables of macroprudential relevance. This life-cycle dynamics is essential for our pol-
icy experiments: as these policies are constraints on the flow of new lending, the life cycle ensures 
a realistic continuous demand for mortgages from borrowers as many of them turn from renters 
into FTBs or HMs and eventually bequeath their properties to the next generation. To the best 
of our knowledge, our ABM is the first to allow for such a flow limit, comprising both hard and 
soft caps. Second, we consider a more realistic modeling of market interactions: a double-auction 
market mechanism. This enables us to generate more realistic LTI distributions, which is partic-
ularly important for the soft LTI policy experiment we perform. Third, our model also includes a 
dynamic BTL sector and a rental market, which allows us to trace spillovers from housing market 
policies targeting owner-occupiers on the rental market. Again, to the best of our knowledge, our 
ABM is the first to allow for a detailed modeling of such interactions between these sectors and 
for an assessment of how macroprudential policy experiments affect these interactions within a 
single framework. Furthermore, the model has the potential to augment the tool kit available for 
policy-making at central banks, allowing them to exploit the heterogeneity and nonlinear effects 
that are rarely captured in other models. This is especially relevant for macroprudential policy 
design as such policies often target sub-sectors of the economy, such as borrowers with certain 
characteristics. We have demonstrated the usefulness of this approach by jointly analyzing the 
effects of such policies on various risk metrics, such as loans with high LTV and LTI ratios. A final, 
technical, contribution is provided by the detailed empirical estimation of behavioral rules and 
parameters, leaving only a few of these parameters to be calibrated with the method of simulated 
moments.
3. Model description
There are three types of agents in the model: (i) households, (ii) a bank, and (iii) a Central Bank. 
Households are the main agents; they interact with each other by buying and selling houses in 
the sales market, as well as by renting and letting their investment properties out in the rental 
market. They also interact with the bank by requesting mortgages to buy houses, which the 
bank provides according to its own internal policy requirements. On top of this bank inter-
nal policy, the Central Bank further regulates the conditions under which mortgages can be
underwritten.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

390 A. Carro et al.
At the beginning of each simulation the target numbers of households are created,3 drawing all 
relevant household characteristics from suitable distributions (independently unless stated oth-
erwise). Notably, households are assigned: (i) an initial age of the Household Reference Person,4 
which will evolve in time and drive the evolution of other household attributes; (ii) a permanent 
income percentile, which will remain fixed throughout the simulation; (iii) a permanent propen-
sity to save; and (iv) an initial financial wealth, dependent on the household’s initial income and 
its propensity to save. In addition, a BTL flag is randomly added to some households, with a 
probability dependent on income percentile, signaling their capacity or willingness to invest in 
BTL properties. Households receiving the BTL flag are also assigned an investor type: capital-
gains-driven, rental-income-driven, or mixed, associated with a specific intensity of their interest 
in capital gains as opposed to the rental yield. Finally, all newly created households are initially 
set to live in social housing, which we define as a temporary accommodation, with no cost, while 
trying to find a house to rent or buy. In a broad sense, this concept of social housing can rep-
resent situations such as homelessness, living with parents, or living out of housing and other 
social benefits. Even though no housing payment is deducted from the households’ income while 
in social housing, they (i) never choose to be in that position, (ii) always try to secure a different 
accommodation option, and (iii) are only put there if they fail to secure any other form of housing 
or as a temporary state between selling a house and buying or renting a new one.
In a similar manner, the number of houses corresponding to the target ratio of houses to 
household is also created at the beginning of the simulation and distributed at random among 
existing households,5 with this housing stock remaining constant thereafter. Since all households 
are initially in social housing, those receiving a house will simply move into it. Each house is 
characterized by a single, discrete parameter, its quality, which is a proxy for all possible features 
differentiating houses from each other and making some more desirable than others, such as their 
location, size, condition, or dwelling type. This discrete house quality is assigned at random at 
the initialization and remains fixed during the simulation, thus dividing the market into equally 
sized segments. Importantly, this reduction of all house features into a single dimension allows 
for all households to have the exact same order of preferences regarding a given set of houses. 
For further details about the initial setup of the model see Appendix 1.1.
The following subsections provide a general description of the model, leaving some of the 
details for Appendix 1. Throughout these subsections, we use Latin letters for identifying specific 
model variables and Greek letters for identifying parameters, with the exception of 𝜀, used to 
denote a random draw from a normal distribution with mean 𝜀𝜇 and standard deviation 𝜀𝜎, 𝜂
used to denote a random draw from a distribution estimated from data, and 𝜎 used to denote the 
standard logistic function 𝜎(𝑥) = 1/(1 + 𝑒−𝑥). The specific values of the parameters, as well as a 
description of the estimation or calibration procedure and the data sources used, can be found 
in Tables A2–A8 in Appendix 2 by referring to the corresponding subsection and/or equation 
number. Further details on the estimation and calibration procedures can be found in the Online 
Appendix.
3.1 Overview of the simulation step
Once the model has been initialized as described above (see also Appendix 1.1), it proceeds 
iteratively in simulation steps of 1 month, where the following updates of model components 
occur:
1. Demographics: New households are born, and some households die and the rest of them 
age. Since the aging process alone would modify the age distribution, we choose both the 
3 While we have tested the model with up to 2 million households, due to the high computational requirements 
of the calibration process, all results reported here are for 10,000 households.
4 The concept of Household Reference Person is used in a number of government surveys for deriving statistics 
and describing the household in terms of the characteristics of the household member selected for the purpose of a 
survey. For a precise definition, see Appendix 1.2.
5 A random distribution of houses to households at the beginning of the simulation may seem crude. Our intention 
is to avoid imposing any structure or correlation between income and financial wealth, and home ownership and quality, 
and instead allow the model to generate that structure endogenously, which it successfully does after a few hundred 
time steps.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 391
birth rate and the death rate—both dependent on age—so as to counteract this effect and 
thus keep the age distribution constant, as well as to keep the total number of house-
holds fluctuating around its target. As those created at model initialization (see above), 
new households are born with all of their characteristics—initial age, income percentile, 
propensity to save, initial financial wealth, and potentially, BTL flag and type—drawn from 
suitable distributions and are set to live in social housing. When a household dies, another 
randomly chosen household inherits all financial and housing wealth. See Appendix 1.2 for 
further details.
2. Households:
(a) Receive income, consume, and pay housing expenses: Households receive a monthly 
income conditional on age, evaluated at the household’s income percentile. Thus, the 
household’s income changes along its lifetime, driven by age, even if its income per-
centile remains fixed. Additionally, households with BTL investments collect rent, if 
applicable. They pay income tax and make national insurance contributions and pay 
for their essential nonhousing consumption. Then they pay their housing expenses: 
Renters pay rent, and owners with a mortgage make their mortgage payments. After 
meeting all of their monthly financial commitments and essential expenses, house-
holds decide on their additional desired consumption, as a function of their remaining 
financial wealth. For further details, see Subsection 3.2.
(b) Make their housing decisions, based on their current status:
• If in social housing, they decide whether to rent or buy a new house;
• If renting, they continue to rent; that is, tenants never decide to leave a rental 
property before the contract expires;
• If owner-occupying a house and not having the BTL flag, they decide whether to sell 
their house;
• If owner-occupying a house and having the BTL flag, they decide whether to buy 
a new investment property and, for each vacant investment property owned, they 
decide whether to sell it. Apart from this, house owners with unsuccessful offers 
from previous months, whether on the sales or the rental market, decide whether to 
update the price of these offers. For further details, see Subsection 3.3.
(c) Place their bids and offers on the relevant market, whether sales or rental.
3. Bank: Provides mortgages as requested by households, complying both with its internal 
lending policy and with that imposed by the Central Bank. After all transactions have been 
processed and all mortgages have been signed, the bank updates its mortgage interest rate 
for the next month, based on the rate for this month and the resulting excess demand for 
credit over the bank’s target. For further details, see Subsection 3.4.
4. Markets: The sales market is cleared first and then the rental market, so that BTL investors 
can directly offer their newly acquired investment properties for rent. Both markets clear in 
the same way, matching bids and offers in a number of rounds until no match is possible. In 
each of these rounds, first, bidders are matched to the best offer they can afford with their 
bid price. Then, households are offered to select one of these matched bids at random, after 
potentially increasing their offer price in case they have received multiple bids. Unsuccessful 
bids are dropped at the end of the clearing process, while unsuccessful offers are kept for 
the following month. For further details, see Subsection 3.5.
3.2 Income, nonhousing consumption, and financial wealth
A household’s gross monthly income is modeled as a function of its age and income percentile. 
In particular, we obtain a distribution of gross income conditional on age from data, which we 
then use to compute a household’s gross income as the inverse cumulative distribution function 
corresponding to the household’s age and evaluated at the household’s income percentile. In this 
way, as households age, their income percentiles remain fixed but their actual incomes change to 
reflect the income distribution over households of that age. The fixed-income percentile assump-
tion effectively implies that there are no idiosyncratic shocks, such as unemployment. Note that 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

392 A. Carro et al.
the income generated in this way does not include the rental income, which is endogenous to the 
model and thus explicitly accounted for. Therefore, for households with BTL investments, their 
current gross rental income has to be added in order to arrive at their gross total income.
This gross total income is subject to tax payments in the form of an income tax6 and national 
insurance contributions, with no capital gains tax applied at any point in the model. Furthermore, 
households are assumed to have an unavoidable minimum level of monthly consumption, which 
we call essential nonhousing consumption and estimate with reference to consumption levels 
among households with incomes around the minimum government income support for a married 
couple.7
Finally, after having met all of their monthly financial commitments and essential expenses, 
including housing expenses, whether rental or mortgage payments 8, households decide on their 
additional desired consumption, i.e. on their nonessential nonhousing consumption. It is impor-
tant to recall at this point that, with the model lacking any macroeconomic dynamics, the only 
role of nonhousing consumption is to determine the households’ financial wealth, which is, in 
turn, of utmost importance for determining the downpayments they can make when buying 
houses and thus mortgages available to them. In this context, we model household consumption 
in such a way that leads to an accurate distribution of financial wealth among the population. 
To this end, we first define, for each household, a target or desired level of financial wealth using 
a distribution of financial wealth conditional on gross income and the household’s propensity to 
save and then set its desired consumption to be a fraction of the difference between the current 
financial wealth of the household and its desired level (see Appendix 1.2.1 for further details). In 
this way, the financial wealth of each household relaxes exponentially toward its desired level, 
thus ensuring that the distribution of financial wealth in the model remains close to the one 
observed in the data. Finally, households save any remaining part of their income or draw down 
their financial wealth if consumption is larger than their disposable income after all previously 
described expenses.
3.3 Housing decisions
Every month, households make their housing decisions depending on their current housing sta-
tus: households without a home (in social housing) decide whether to rent or buy a new house, 
homeowners without the BTL flag decide whether to sell their home, and homeowners with the 
BTL flag decide whether to increase or decrease their investment portfolio. Renters simply con-
tinue to rent until the end of their current rental contracts, when they make the same decisions 
as if they were in social housing.9 Thus, no specific subsection is devoted to them here.
3.3.1 Decisions if in social housing
All households in need of a new home are represented as being in social housing, including newly 
formed households, previous renters whose contracts have expired, and previous homeowners 
having sold their homes. These households have to decide (i) whether to rent or buy a new house, 
i.e. in which market to bid; (ii) how much to bid in the chosen market; and (iii) how much to 
pay as a downpayment in case they decide to buy. In order to make the first decision, they first 
decide on a desired purchase price, i.e., on how much they would like to spend on buying a house, 
given the maximum mortgage available to them. Then, they find out the maximum house quality 
they can afford with that desired purchase price. Afterward, the decision is made by comparing 
6 When computing the income tax liability, we take into account the tax relief available to BTL investors with 
rented out properties.
7 While these expenses are unavoidable, the specific parameter values used lead to an essential nonhousing 
consumption smaller than the minimum possible net income and are thereby unable to lead to bankruptcies.
8 It is possible at this point that a household cannot afford these payments. Since the model does not seek to 
capture the nuances of bankruptcy dynamics (from delinquency to foreclosure), we simply consider these households 
as directly bankrupt. In this case, we ensure that scheduled payments are always made by artificially injecting as much 
cash as necessary, without further action against the bankrupt household (see Appendix 1.3 for further details). Note 
that in the UK, the number of arrears and defaults has been relatively low during the time period under consideration 
and does not appear to drive housing market dynamics. Also, ad hoc government policies may support homeowners 
during times of crisis, for example mortgage payment holidays during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic.
9 Importantly, most households will manage to secure a new accommodation starting right after the end of their 
previous tenancy. Only those failing to do so will actually spend time in social housing.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 393
the annual costs of buying for that desired purchase price with those of renting a house of the 
same quality. If they decide to buy a house, they simply go ahead with the computed desired 
purchase price, while they compute a specific desired rental price if the decision is to rent. Finally, 
if deciding to buy, households must also choose a desired downpayment, which might later on 
be overruled if it is below the minimum downpayment required by the bank.
In the spirit of Axtell et al. (2014), we model the desired purchase price pd as an exponen-
tially noisy and nonlinear function of the household’s gross annual income, capped by the price 
corresponding to the maximum mortgage available to the household pmax, 
𝑝𝑑 = min(𝛼 𝑦 𝛽𝑒𝜀 , 𝑝 max) , (1)
where y is the household’s gross annual income and 𝜀 is a normal noise. However, as opposed to 
the original specification by Axtell et al. (2014), we do not consider a denominator dependent on 
the current price trend, as we did not find this component to significantly improve the estimation 
with our data. Furthermore, for the sake of the decision between renting and buying, we consider 
a version of this desired purchase price capped by prime quality prices, 
𝑝′
𝑑 = min(𝑝𝑑 , 𝑝𝑄max
) , (2)
where 𝑝𝑄max
 is the exponential moving average sale price of houses of the maximum quality
(see Appendix 1.6 for details on the market price information available to households).
The purpose of this latter cap is to prevent comparing artificially large desired purchase prices, 
potentially detached from current market dynamics, with rental prices which are by definition 
(see below) based on current market dynamics and thus unlikely to be unreasonably large.
The annual cost of buying a house for the household’s desired purchase price capped by prime 
quality prices, 𝑝′
𝑑, can be defined as the annual mortgage payments, 12 𝑚, where m is the monthly 
payment of the mortgage required by the household for such a purchase, minus the annual house 
price appreciation, 𝑝′
𝑑 𝑔, where g is the expected annual house price growth. Based on survey data 
(see Appendix 2 Table A4 for details), we model households’ house price growth expectations as 
a linear function of past house price growth, 
𝑔 = 𝛾 HPA + 𝜁 , (3)
where HPA is the (geometric) mean annual house price appreciation between the most recent 
quarter and the quarter 2 years before. In order to compare this annual purchase cost with an 
equivalent rental option, the household must first find out the house quality Q they can afford 
to buy under current market conditions. They do this by comparing this desired price with the 
exponential moving average sale prices of the different house qualities. Then, the annual cost 
of renting is computed as the annual exponential moving average rent price for a house of this 
quality Q under current market conditions, rQ, multiplied by a factor (1 + 𝜆), which represents 
a psychological cost of renting 10. The total annual cost of buying is 12𝑚 − 𝑝′
𝑑 𝑔, while that of 
renting is 𝑟𝑄 (1 + 𝜆). The discrete choice between these two options, buying versus renting, can be 
modeled as a logistic function of the difference between their respective costs, with a sensitivity 
parameter 𝜃 setting how noisy or deterministic the decision is. In this way, the probability of 
deciding to buy, as oppose to rent, can be written11 as 
𝑃buy = 𝜎(𝜃[𝑟𝑄 (1 + 𝜆) − (12𝑚 − 𝑝′
𝑑 𝑔) ]), (4)
where the logistic function is given by 𝜎(𝑥) = 1/(1 + 𝑒−𝑥). As an exception to this decision rule, 
households with the BTL flag will always decide to buy, in order to avoid situations where BTL 
investors themselves are renting or bidding in the rental market.
10 We assume that, given the same overall cost, households inherently prefer buying a property over renting it, if 
they had either option. This “psychological cost of renting” factor determines how much lower the cost of a property, 
if rented, would need to be in order for households to be indifferent between renting or buying it.
11 We followed the theory of the user cost of owner-occupied housing and the rental equivalence, which was first 
developed by Gillingham (1980), in designing the decision of buying vs. renting. Gillingham (1980) defines the user 
cost of housing as “the opportunity cost of holding the house less the increase in the house’s value.” In equilibrium, this 
should be equal to the cost of renting for the same period of time.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

394 A. Carro et al.
In case the household decides to buy a house, it simply sends a bid to the sales market for its 
desired purchase price pd, defined in Equation (1). Equivalently, if the household decides to rent 
a house, then it sends a bid to the rental market for its desired rental price rd. Similarly to its 
purchase price equivalent, the desired rental price rd is also defined as a nonlinear function of the 
household’s gross annual income y, 
𝑟𝑑 = min(𝜇 𝑦 𝜈 , 𝑟 max) , (5)
but in this case the function is not noisy, reflecting the far smaller fluctuations in desired rental 
prices as compared to desired purchase prices, and it is capped by the available net income of the 
household after the essential consumption, rmax.
If a household chooses to buy, then it decides whether to buy outright with cash or by obtain-
ing a mortgage. If the financial wealth of the household is greater than the price of the house, 
it will pay for the house in cash; 12 otherwise, it will apply for a mortgage and choose a desired 
downpayment. While a minimum downpayment is determined by the mortgage conditions set 
by the bank, the household may choose to make a larger downpayment. In particular, since FTBs 
tend to use most of their financial wealth when buying a house, we model their desired downpay-
ments as their full current financial wealth. For all HMs, a desired downpayment is computed 
using a distribution estimated from data by analyzing the inverse cumulative distribution at the 
household’s income percentile and multiplying this result by the current house price index (HPI), 
such that downpayments adapt to current market conditions.
3.3.2 Decisions as an owner-occupier
Households sell their owner-occupied property on an average of every 17 years, based on UK 
data, due to exogenous reasons not addressed in the model, such as starting a family or divorce. 
In order to prevent landlords from selling their homes and potentially becoming unable to buy a 
new one or even deciding to rent, we only allow homeowners without the BTL flag to sell their 
homes. If the household decides to sell its home, it will offer it on the market at a price ps given 
by 
ln 𝑝𝑠 = ln(𝑝𝑄), +𝜂, (6)
where 𝑝𝑄 is the exponential moving average sale price of houses of this quality and 𝜂 is a random 
markup drawn from an estimated distribution (see Appendix 2 Table A5 for estimation details). 
This is a similar equation to the one used by Axtell et al. (2014), although simplified to focus 
only on the influence of average prices of similar houses, which we find to be the main driver in 
our estimation.
For each month a house remains unsold on the market, the seller has a certain probability 
of reducing its price. When a reduction takes place, the new price will be 𝑝𝑡
𝑠 = 𝑝𝑡−1
𝑠 (1 −exp(𝜀)), 
where t indicates the time step and 𝜀 is a normal noise. Both the probability of a price reduction 
and the specific mechanism or functional form of the updated price are estimated from data 
(see Appendix 2 Table A5 for estimation details). If the seller has a mortgage on this property 
and the price drops below the corresponding outstanding mortgage principal owed to the bank, 
then the offer is withdrawn from the market. After successfully selling its home, a household is 
temporarily set to be in social housing, where it will have to decide again whether to buy a new 
home or switch to renting.13
12 Note that this rule of behavior, while extremely simple, is enough for the model to generate a roughly correct 
proportion of cash buyers.
13 While in reality households would try to secure an alternative accommodation before selling their home—e.g., 
via short-term rentals or by coordinating the sale and purchase to happen simultaneously, a detailed depiction of these 
mechanisms is beyond the scope of our model, which focuses only on those aspects of the housing market most likely 
to matter for macroprudential policy. Given the larger number of rental as compared to sale transactions, implementing 
short-term rentals for HMs in our model would at most have a negligible impact on prices and tenancies. The coor-
dination of simultaneous sales and purchases, on the other hand, would play the role of a market friction delaying 
transactions, but with no effect on the balance between supply and demand and thus no impact on prices.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 395
3.3.3 Decisions as a BTL investor
Each month BTL investors decide whether to bid for a new investment property, and for each 
owned investment property which is vacant or at the end of its tenancy agreement, they decide 
whether to keep it or sell it. Both these decisions are based on the expected yield to be obtained 
from such investments, which is a function of the expected rental yield and the expected capital 
gains. This setup is designed to capture the various motives that investors may have, such as 
obtaining a steady stream of rental income or seeking capital gains to be realized only after the 
sale of the property. In particular, we consider three types of investors with different weights on 
capital gains as opposed to rental yield: (i) capital-gain-driven investors, with a large weight on 
capital gains; (ii) rental-income-driven investors, with a small weight on capital gains; and (iii) 
mixed investors, with equal weights on capital gains and rental yield. Moreover, we use survey 
data to estimate the respective shares of these types of investors (see Appendix 2 Table A6 for 
estimation details).
When deciding whether to bid for a new investment property, BTL investors compute the 
expected yield Vbuy of a hypothetical house, making use of the highest amount of leverage 
available to them. Leverage is computed as the price corresponding to the maximum mortgage 
available to the investors, pmax, divided by the minimum downpayment the investors could make 
for such a mortgage, dmin. Moreover, they assume the expected rental yield of this hypothetical 
investment property to be the current exponential moving average rental yield over all house 
qualities 𝑠, which takes into account the expected average occupancy of an investment property. 
Finally, they compute the mortgage cost as the annual mortgage payment corresponding to the 
maximum mortgage available to the household, 12 𝑚max, divided by the initial equity on the 
investment, which is again the minimum downpayment dmin. In this way, the expected yield can 
be written as a weighted sum of both rental and capital yield rates times the leverage minus the 
mortgage cost, 
𝑉buy = 𝑝max
𝑑min
(𝛿𝑖 𝑔 + (1 − 𝛿𝑖)𝑠) − 12 𝑚max
𝑑min
, (7)
where g is the expected annual house price growth, as set in Equation (3), and 𝛿i is the weight 
given by the specific investor type i to capital gains as opposed to rental yield. By modeling the 
annual probability to buy a new investment property as a logistic function of its expected yield, 
we can write the corresponding monthly probability as 
𝑃 BTL
buy = 1 − (1 − 𝜎(𝜉𝑉buy))
1
12 , (8)
where 𝜉 is a sensitivity parameter, setting how noisy or deterministic the decision is. 14 If the 
investor decides to buy a new property, she will place a bid in the sales market for an amount cor-
responding to her maximum available mortgage, pmax. Finally, if the bid is successful, the investor 
will pay for the house outright if she has enough financial wealth to do so, requesting a mortgage 
from the bank otherwise. In case of requiring a mortgage, the investor will also choose a desired 
downpayment, which we model as a draw from a normal distribution of downpayment frac-
tions with parameters estimated from data and thus independent of income considerations. This 
desired downpayment is further multiplied by the current HPI, such that investor downpayments 
adapt to current market conditions.
Investors always try to rent out their vacant investment properties; that is, as soon as a 
rental contract ends or whenever a new investment property is bought or inherited, the owner 
offers it for rent on the rental market. Similarly to the ask price for offers in the sales market
(see Equation [6]), investors offer their investment properties in the rental market for a monthly 
rent rs given by 
ln 𝑟𝑠 = ln(𝑟𝑄), +𝜂, (9)
where 𝑟𝑄 is the exponential moving average rent price of houses of this quality and 𝜂 is a random 
markup drawn from an estimated distribution. Each month a house remains vacant on the rental 
14 Note that the probability of buying this month is equal to one minus the probability of not buying this month, 
which is equal to the probability of not buying this year raised to the power of 1/12.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

396 A. Carro et al.
market, with a certain probability its price is reduced as 𝑟𝑡
𝑠 = 𝑟𝑡−1
𝑠 (1 −exp(𝜀)), where 𝜀 is a normal 
noise. Finally, the length of a rental agreement is chosen uniformly at random between 12 and 
24 months. For details on all parameters and estimated distributions, see Appendix 2 Table A6.
At the end of each tenancy agreement and for as long as the property remains unoccupied, the 
BTL owner of the house will consider whether to sell it or not. Similarly to the decision to buy new 
investment properties, the decision to sell those currently owned is also based on the computation 
of an investment yield Vsell. However, in this case the investment yield is computed for a specific 
instead of a hypothetical house and thus for specific house quality and mortgage characteristics. 
It can, therefore, be considered as an effective yield for the property under consideration. In 
particular, the leverage can now be written as the current exponential average sale price of houses 
of the same quality, 𝑝𝑄, divided by the current equity stake of the household in the house, k, 
which can be computed in a mark-to-market style as the current exponential average sale price 
of houses of the same quality minus the remaining mortgage principal. Furthermore, an effective 
rental yield s can now be computed for this specific property by multiplying its current rental 
price by the expected average occupancy of houses of the same quality and dividing this by the 
current exponential average sale price of houses of this quality. Finally, the mortgage cost can 
now be computed with the actual annual mortgage payment 12 𝑚 divided by the current equity 
stake of the household in the house, k. As before, the effective yield can be written as a weighted 
sum of both rental and capital yield rates times the leverage minus the mortgage cost, 
𝑉sell = 𝑝𝑄
𝑘 (𝛿𝑖 𝑔 + (1 − 𝛿𝑖)𝑠) − 12 𝑚
𝑘 , (10)
where g is the expected annual house price growth (see Equation [3]) and 𝛿i is the weight given by 
the specific investor type i to capital gains as opposed to rental yield. In this way, we can write the 
monthly probability of deciding to sell an empty investment property as one minus the monthly 
probability of deciding to keep it, 
𝑃 BTL
sell = 1 − 𝜎(𝜉𝑉sell)
1
12 , (11)
where 𝜉 is a sensitivity parameter, setting how noisy or deterministic the decision is. If the investor 
decides to sell the property, she will place an offer in the sales market at the price given by 
Equation (6).
3.4 Mortgage lending and its regulation: the bank and the Central Bank
The bank, which represents the mortgage lending sector in the aggregate, has the main role of 
extending mortgages to households. In doing so, it applies its own internal policy regarding under-
writing standards, which reflect its internal risk appetite. In practical terms, these underwriting 
standards translate into constraints on the maximum amount of mortgage credit that the bank 
would be willing to extend to each potential borrower, given their income or financial wealth. 
In particular, the bank considers four types of mortgage constraints, with parameters estimated 
based on the UK banking sector (see Appendix 2 Table A7 for estimation details):
• LTV limit. A maximum value Γ𝑖 is set for the ratio of the principal borrowed q over the 
value of the collateral, which is assumed to be equal to the transaction price of the house 
to be bought, with i representing the type of household (i.e., FTB, HM, or BTL investor). 
This sets a maximum value for the principal the household can borrow q as a function of the 
downpayment to be made d. Since the maximum possible downpayment is the household’s 
full financial wealth w, the principal q must satisfy 
𝑞 ≤ Γ𝑖
1 − Γ𝑖
𝑤. (12)
• LTI limit. A maximum value Φ𝑖 is set for the ratio of the principal borrowed q over the 
household’s gross annual income y, with i representing the type of household. Thus, the 
principal to be borrowed q must satisfy 
𝑞 ≤ Φ 𝑖 𝑦. (13)
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 397
• Debt-service-to-income (DSTI) limit. A maximum value Ψ is set for the ratio of the monthly 
mortgage payment over the household’s gross monthly income 𝑦/12. This represents an 
affordability test. Writing the monthly mortgage payment as a function of the monthly inter-
est rate 𝑟/12, the number of payments n, and the mortgage principal q, the principal q must 
satisfy 
𝑞 ≤ Ψ 𝑦 1 − (1 + 𝑟/12)
−𝑛
𝑟 . (14)
• Interest-coverage-ratio (ICR) limit. For BTL mortgages, a minimum value Ω is set for the ratio 
of the expected annual rental income over the annual interest expenses. This limit ensures that 
the rental income earned on the property exceeds the interest cost of the mortgage by a safety 
margin, which is meant to cover taxes, maintenance, changes in interest rates, or periods of 
vacancy, among others. Writing the expected annual rental income as the price of the house 
to be bought times the exponential moving average rental yield over all house qualities 𝑠 and 
bearing in mind that the maximum possible downpayment is the household’s full financial 
wealth w, the principal q must satisfy 
𝑞 ≤ 𝑤
Ω 𝑟
𝑠 − 1
. (15)
Apart from these internal policy constraints, the mortgages extended by the bank must also 
comply with the lending regulation imposed by the Central Bank, which can also set LTV, LTI, 
DSTI and ICR limits. Each regulation set by the Central Bank can take two different forms: either 
it can be defined as a hard limit, preventing any lending beyond the corresponding hard cap, or 
it can be defined as a soft limit, allowing for a certain fraction of new mortgages to exceed the 
corresponding soft cap. This allowance is calculated over a 12-month rolling window. Note that, 
in the latter case, the bank will endogenously decide how many offers—mortgage in principle 
letters—over the soft limit to issue each month so as to remain under the maximum fraction once 
the market clears,15 and it will assign these high-LTI offers on a first-come-first-serve basis.
Depending on the type of borrower, the bank offers two different mortgage products:
• Loans to owner-occupiers. The only mortgage product that the bank offers to owner-occupier 
borrowers is a fixed-rate repayment mortgage with a maturity of 25 years,16 which is reduced 
depending on the borrower’s age in such a way that all principal is repaid by retirement age 
(i.e. 65 years old). Mortgages to owner-occupiers have to comply with three constraints: (i) 
an LTV limit, (ii) an LTI limit, and (iii) a DSTI or affordability limit.17
• Loans to BTL investors. The only mortgage product that the bank offers to BTL borrowers 
is a fixed-rate interest-only mortgage with a fixed maturity of 25 years, which can only be 
offered until the borrower’s retirement age (i.e. 65 years old). Note that a significant portion 
of BTL mortgages in the UK are interest-only and that the repayment of the principal is due 
only at the end of the term.18 Mortgages to BTL investors are subject to two constraints: (i) 
an LTV limit and (ii) an ICR limit.
15 Since it is impossible to know beforehand how many of the mortgage in principle letter holders will actually 
succeed in buying a house expensive enough to require a mortgage over the soft limit, there can be small and temporary 
breaches of the maximum fraction.
16 In the UK, it is unusual for mortgage products beyond a 10-year term to have interest rates that are fixed for 
the whole term (e.g. 25 years). However, as monetary policy is exogenous in our model and there is no default, flexible 
interest rates would only have a minor effect on housing market dynamics. A more realistic interest rate setup is deferred 
to future research within a model with monetary policy and default.
17 In reality, the affordability test is often based on a stressed interest rate that is higher than the actual product 
rate, thereby leading to a more stringent test. The rationale behind a stressed rate is to account for changes in interest 
rates that may adversely affect a borrower’s ability to make payments in the future if interest rates were to rise. Since the 
Central Bank policy rate is kept fixed and the bank spread fluctuates closely around its estimated value for our target 
calibration year, there is no need for such a stressed rate in our model.
18 Since BTL investors have no explicit saving motive for this final repayment of the principal, a mechanism is 
needed to prevent them from facing bankruptcy at the end of the term if they are not able to find a buyer for the 
property right away. In particular, from 2 years to maturity, they put the property up for sale whenever their financial 
wealth is not enough to repay the owed principal in full.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

398 A. Carro et al.
Importantly, there are no supply-side credit constraints in this model, e.g. there is no endoge-
nous factor that could limit the supply of credit, such as liquidity or solvency constraints. Hence, 
there is no limit in principle regarding fiat money creation beyond the demand-side constraints 
already mentioned, and thus all credit applications complying with these borrower-based limits 
are always approved by the bank. The only endogenous lever for the bank to influence household 
demand for credit is the interest rate spread, which it sets in response to changes in the demand 
and with the goal of reaching a target level of credit per household (see Appendix 1.4 for fur-
ther details).19 In this way, the bank reacts to increases (decreases) in the demand for credit with 
increases (decreases) in the interest rate spread of the mortgage products it offers. Finally, note 
that the interest rate paid by households on their mortgages is the sum of the described variable 
interest rate spread set by the bank and a fixed policy rate exogenously set by the Central Bank. 
That is, monetary policy is considered as exogenous and constant in our model.
3.5 Housing markets
The model contains two separate markets: a sales and a rental market. After households have 
sent their sale and rental bids and offers to the respective markets, these markets are cleared 
according to a double auction process, with the sales market being cleared first, followed by the 
rental market, so that BTL investors can directly offer their newly acquired investment properties 
for rent. The double auction process in each market proceeds in a number of rounds or iterations, 
where each iteration consists of two phases: (i) a matching phase, where each bid is matched to 
a specific offer, and (ii) a selection phase, where a specific bid is selected for each offer having 
received any bids.
In the sales market, owner-occupier bids are matched to the offer with the highest quality 
that they can afford and, within a given quality, to the cheapest house available. BTL bids, on 
the contrary, are matched to the offer with the highest expected gross rental yield that they can 
afford. In the rental market, all bids are matched to the offer with the highest quality that they 
can afford and, again, cheaper houses are preferred in case of equal quality. As a result, in both 
markets, some offers are matched to one or multiple bids while others might not be matched to 
any. Similarly, bids with too low a bidding price are not matched to any offer.20
In the selection phase of both markets, the procedure iterates through the offers that were 
matched to any bids. For offers that were matched to a single bidder, that bidder is selected and 
the transaction is completed at the price demanded by the seller. For offers that were matched 
to multiple bidders, the seller has a certain probability to increase or bid up the price by a small 
amount (see Appendix 1.5 for details). A bidder is then randomly chosen among those who can 
still afford the offer, and the transaction is completed at the updated offer price.21
Unsuccessful bids and offers are returned to their respective market general pool, and the 
process continues in more matching and selection rounds until (i) there are no more bids left, 
(ii) there are no more offers left, or (iii) the bids that remain cannot be matched with any of 
the offers that remain, their bid prices being below the available offer prices. At the end of the 
clearing process, all remaining unsuccessful bids are deleted; that is, the households who made 
them will have to bid again in the following month if they so decide. On the contrary, all remaining 
unsuccessful offers are kept for the following month, although the households who made them 
might decide later on to update their offer price or remove the offer from the market.
19 Note that, while the aforementioned underwriting standards do also influence the demand for credit, these are 
exogenous fixed limits and thus cannot be used to address endogenously emerging temporary over- and undershootings 
of the credit supply target.
20 In terms of the informational structure of the markets, these rules imply that the matching phase is characterized 
by perfect information, in the sense that bidders have access to information about the price and quality of all available 
offers, such that they can find their optimal bidding option given their bidding price.
21 We choose the winning bid at random and not simply select the bidder with the highest bidding price to reflect the 
fact that the maximum bidding price (i.e. the maximum price a bidder is willing to pay) is considered private information, 
and thus it is not known to the seller. Note that this random selection plays the role of a market imperfection, in the 
sense that households with a higher maximum bidding price (usually wealthier) may occasionally not be selected among 
multiple bidders and could end up having to bid for a lower-quality house (usually cheaper).
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 399
Figure 1. House price cycles
Source: OECD.Stat database. United Kingdom, real HPI, seasonally adjusted. Data are de-trended with the help of 
a Hodrick–Prescott filter, using a smoothing parameter, 𝜆, of 129, 600 (3602). An equivalent time period is taken 
from simulated data of a typical run of the model.
4. Validation
Significant advances have been made in recent years regarding the validation of ABMs ( Fagiolo 
et al., 2019). In this paper, we assess how the output of the model matches with key features of the 
housing and mortgage market observed in the data for the UK. Our comparisons comprise broad 
patterns and stylized facts (such as the emergence of house price cycles), but also quantitative 
measures, such as the mean and range of various housing and mortgage market indicators. This 
broadly follows the approach taken by the macro ABM literature, for example Dawid et al.
(2012), Ashraf et al. (2017), and Popoyan et al. (2017). One difference is that the literature mostly 
seeks to match first and second moments, while our focus is also on distributions. Distributions 
are important in the context of the policy experiments below, in particular the soft LTI flow limit, 
in which a certain share of borrowers is not affected by the policy. Due to space constraints, we 
only show some of these validation checks here.
One of the key features of the model is its ability to generate real-world-like house price cycles, 
which emerge naturally from the interactions of buyers and sellers in the market. Figure 1 shows 
the HPI in a sample simulation run of 50 years. The model appears to match the amplitude and 
frequency of the observed data reasonably well. While we do not incorporate in the model all 
factors that affect house price cycles in reality, such as credit supply conditions, we are still able 
to broadly match the pattern found in the data. 
While household expectations, encapsulated in the house price growth expectation in 
Equation (3), are the main factors behind the house price cycles in the model, heterogeneity 
is also fundamental for cycles to appear in this framework. 22 In particular, income and wealth 
heterogeneity, as well as the existence of an active BTL sector, play an essential role in the emer-
gence of strong cycles, with realistic peak-to-trough amplitudes. The specific role of these factors, 
however, will vary across the different phases of the cycle. For instance, at the beginning of the 
boom phase, as prices start increasing and, with them, also expected capital gains, more and 
more households are driven to bid in the ownership market. As prices continue to rise and more 
constrained households (lower income and lower financial wealth) are progressively priced out of 
the market, less constrained households (higher income and higher financial wealth) are still able 
to bid and absorb the available houses on offer, thereby driving further price increases. More-
over, price growth drives capital-gains-seeking BTL investors to keep their properties and even 
try to acquire more, thereby at the same time increasing the demand and reducing the offer. In 
22 In fact, if either expectations or household heterogeneity are deactivated (respectively, by setting the expected 
price growth to zero and by assigning all households the same income, propensity to save, and investor type), the cycles 
completely disappear and the HPI behaves as small fluctuations around the mean.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

400 A. Carro et al.
this way, household heterogeneity allows for longer and stronger boom phases, as demand moves 
from being sustained by the whole household sector to being more and more concentrated among 
wealthier households and BTL investors. As prices increase further, at some point, the simulated 
housing market starts to run out of wealthy enough households able and willing to buy new prop-
erties. As a consequence, the demand becomes unable to absorb the available houses on offer, and 
so the price trend reverses and prices start falling, initiating the bust phase of the cycle. As prices 
drop and expected capital losses soar, renting becomes more and more attractive with respect to 
buying, which keeps the demand down even if prices are progressively becoming more afford-
able. At the same time, expected capital losses also drive capital-gains-seeking BTL investors to 
decrease their portfolios of properties; thus, both reducing the demand and increasing the offer 
in the ownership market. Finally, as prices decrease further, more and more households become 
progressively unconstrained and could potentially afford to bid in the ownership market. Even if 
their probability to do so is very low due to the expected capital losses, as the number of potential 
buyers increases sufficiently, at least some of them will decide to buy. This will gradually mod-
erate, eventually stop, and finally reverse the price trend, thereby triggering a new cycle. Again, 
income and wealth heterogeneity are crucial for this process to be sufficiently gradual, thereby 
allowing for larger price drops and longer bust phases.23
We further compare the simulation results with several empirical housing and mortgage market 
statistics. We use data from 2011 as our baseline mainly for three reasons: first, the year 2011 
precedes the housing market policies (an LTI policy and an affordability test) introduced by the 
BoE in 2014. As we perform similar policy experiments in Section 5, this allows us to more 
clearly assess their effects compared with an environment with no such policies in place. Second, 
2011 represents a point in time that can be considered as comparatively “neutral” from a housing 
cycle perspective in the UK, i.e. neither a boom nor a bust episode. This allows for a relatively 
natural benchmark for our model. Third, 2011 coincides with the best data availability between 
the Great Recession and the introduction of the BoE’s housing market policies, in particular in 
relation with certain survey data.24
The UK housing market can be characterized by a significant gap between the rate of house 
building and growth in demand and growth in house prices in excess of earnings. In 2011, around 
65% of the housing stock was owner-occupied, 25 and the share of property wealth (excluding 
private pension wealth) of total wealth was 60%.26 The UK household mortgage debt has been 
historically high relative to income; in particular, equal to 103.8% of household income by 2011 
(see Table 1).
Table 1 provides a comparison of average monthly house prices, the number of housing trans-
actions and mortgage approvals, and the mortgage DTI ratio generated by the model (averaged 
over 50 Monte Carlo simulations) and real data in 2011. Apart from the number of housing 
transactions, the other three indicators are very close to the 2011 values. Note that the average 
number of housing transactions is well within the range of the minimum and maximum values 
observed in the data between 2005 and 2014.27
Table 2 shows that the average LTV, LTI, and house-price-to-income ratios as well as the age28 
of owner-occupier mortgage borrowers generated by the model (averaged over 50 Monte Carlo 
23 Note that, if all households had the exact same (or very similar) income and wealth, then they would all become 
constrained or unconstrained at the exact same (or very similar) price level. As a consequence, any increasing price 
trend above that level would be quickly met by a drastic drop in demand, while any decreasing price trend below that 
level would be quickly counteracted by a strong rise in demand, thereby not allowing these initial trends to develop into 
realistic boom and bust episodes.
24 These are also the reasons why we calibrate the model with 2011 data, where available. See Appendix 2 and the 
Online Appendix for further detail on the data used for the calibration.
25 Source is Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) Table 101—live tables on dwelling stock 
(including vacants).
26 Source is the Office for National Statistics (ONS) Wealth and Assets Survey—Wealth in Great Britain, Table 2.1.
27 The choice of the 2005–2014 period is based on several factors: (i) data are available from 2005 on; (ii) it covers 
a full boom and bust cycle; and (iii) it predates the impact of the BoE’s LTI and affordability policies introduced in 
2014.
28 Note that while data on households’ age distribution are used to calibrate the model, the mortgage borrowers’ 
age distribution is endogenous due to their housing and mortgage decisions.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 401
T able 1. Housing and mortgage market indicators
Simulation 2011  2005–2014
Mean Mean Min Max
(a) Average house prices (£ 1000) 171.8 167.9 153.9 193.2
(b) Housing transactions (1000) 100 73.7 51.6 149.4
(c) Mortgage approvals (1000) 51.9 49.3 26.6 129.1
(d) Mortgage DTI ratio (%) 98 103.8 94.3 109.4
Source: (a) UK average house prices are obtained from the ONS. (b) Housing transactions are the number of residential 
property transactions in the UK with a value of £ 40,000 or above per month (HM Revenue and Customs). (c) Seasonally 
adjusted mortgage approvals for sterling loans secured on dwellings, net of cancellations (BoE). For (b) and (c) see 
underlying data of the BoE June 2014 Financial Stability Report Chart 2.8. (d) Mortgage DTI ratio (BoE), see underlying 
data of the BoE November 2017 Financial Stability Report Chart A.9.
T able 2. Owner-occupier mortgage characteristics
Simulation PSD
Mean LTV ratio (%) 65.8 68.3
Mean LTI ratio 2.84 2.97
Mean house-price-to-income ratio 4.4 4.7
Mean age (years) 35.3 35.7
Source: The Financial Conduct Authority’s (FCA) loan-level Product Sales Data (PSD), which include regulated mortgage 
contracts only. The above statistics are calculated with 2011 data.
simulations) are in line with the averages of these variables obtained from a comprehensive loan-
level mortgage dataset. Figure 2 (a–d) shows the distributions of the same variables, which further 
supports a good qualitative fit between the model and the real data.
We also compare our simulation results against real data to understand the composition of 
risky lending, i.e. loans with a high LTV and/or LTI ratio29. First, we group owner-occupier house 
transactions (financed by mortgages) into five house price quintiles. Figure 2 (e) shows, for high-
LTV lending, the share of mortgages by house price quintile, e.g. 26% of high-LTV loans finance 
houses in the lowest quintile. Similarly, Figure 2 (f) shows the share of mortgages by house price 
quintile for high-LTI lending, e.g. 22% of high-LTI loans finance houses in the highest quintile. 
Our simulation results are consistent with real data both in terms of the shares in each house 
price quintile as well as the monotonic relationship between the lowest and highest quintiles.
A realistic rental market is one of the key features of our model. We provide a compari-
son between simulation and real data for rental income and the distribution of BTL properties. 
Figure  2 (g–h) shows that our simulation is comparable with real data regarding the distribu-
tion of rental income earned by BTL investors and the number of BTL properties held per BTL 
investor. 
5. Experiments
We use the model to perform a series of comparative static exercises to investigate the impact of 
macroprudential housing policies on the mortgage, housing, and rental markets. These are hypo-
thetical experiments that do not represent any actual policies by the BoE. We conduct two policy 
experiments by imposing regulatory restrictions on households’ ability to access mortgages: (i) a 
hard LTV limit and (ii) a soft LTI limit.
In the benchmark case, the maximum LTV ratio that the bank applies to owner-occupier 
mortgages is 90%. In the first experiment, the maximum LTV ratio for owner-occupier mortgages 
is capped at 85% by the Central Bank. In the second experiment, the Central Bank imposes an 
29 High-LTV lending is defined as an LTV ratio of 75% and above. High-LTI lending is defined as an LTI ratio of 
above 3.35—the threshold for our policy experiment as described in Section 5—to provide a consistent comparison.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

402 A. Carro et al.
Figure 2. Simulation vs. real data—comparison of key mortgage and rental market variables
Source: (a)–(f) The FCA ’s loan-level PSD (2011), which includes regulated mortgage contracts only; (g) Wealth and 
Asset Survey (WAS) Wave 3 (2010–2012); (h) English Private Landlord Survey (EPLS, 2018). All model results are 
averages over 50 Monte Carlo simulations.
LTI soft limit of 3.35,30 but allows the bank to issue 15% of new mortgage lending with an LTI 
30 This limit is chosen in a such a way that the percentage of borrowers affected by the LTI policy experiment 
will be similar to the LTV policy experiment, e.g. in the benchmark case around 20% of borrowers have mortgages 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 403
T able 3. The aggregate effects of policy experiments on key indicators
Benchmark LTV cap LTI cap
LTV ratio (%) 65.8 63.6 63.3
LTI ratio 2.84 2.71 2.4
No. of mortgage approvals 51,898 50,085 52,100
DTI ratio (%) 98 89.1 87.9
No. of housing transactions 100,006 100,433 100,500
Sale price (£) 171,768 166,473 164,655
Note: These statistics are averages over 50 Monte Carlo simulations.
above this limit. 31 The allowance is calculated over a 12-month rolling window. Note that the 
bank also maintains its hard internal LTI limit (i.e. a maximum LTI of 5.6 for HMs and of 5.4 
for FTBs).
In the following subsections, we analyze how a range of mortgage, housing, and rental market 
indicators are affected by these experiments, compared with the benchmark of no policy. We 
consider how the policy experiments affect these variables in the aggregate, how they change 
their time-series behavior, and how they affect different types of households. Note that all results 
presented within this section correspond to averages over 50 Monte Carlo simulations.
5.1 Aggregate effects
Table 3 presents the aggregate effects of the policy experiments 32 on several key variables. As 
expected, the LTV and LTI policy experiments lead to a significant decrease in the average LTV 
and LTI ratios, respectively, as the policies directly impact the availability and size of these loans 
to borrowers (we will look at the LTV and LTI distributions in more detail in Section 5.3).
Compared to the benchmark case, mortgage approvals fall by an average of 3.5% under the 
LTV policy experiment, while the LTI policy experiment does not make a significant difference. 
One explanation is that the LTV policy is a hard limit, while the LTI policy allows for a 15% 
share of mortgages to be issued above the set limit. The LTV policy considered here may, therefore, 
exclude some borrowers permanently from the mortgage market, while the bank has more flexi-
bility to accommodate borrowers under the soft LTI policy. Interestingly, the aggregate DTI ratio 
falls by about the same amount, 10% points, under both policy experiments. This, together with 
the differences in mortgage approvals, hints at the fact that the size of the average mortgage the 
bank grants is higher under the LTV than the LTI policy. The policy experiments may, therefore, 
have distributional consequences at the extensive and intensive margins, i.e. some households 
may not be able to receive mortgages and the size of mortgages available to them may change.
The number of housing transactions proves remarkably stable in the presence of the policy 
experiments. The reason is that, in our model, housing transactions are essentially determined 
by structural factors over the long run, such as demographics (which we do not vary during the 
simulation). Additionally, cash buyers and BTL investors who are not affected by these policy 
experiments can fill the gap in the housing market. We assess this further in Sections 5.3 and  5.4.
Average sale prices are lower under both policy experiments, falling by about 3.1% for the 
LTV and 4.1% for the LTI limit compared with the benchmark case. This is consistent with the 
literature, which tends to find that an increase in the availability of credit leads to higher house 
prices, especially if housing supply is inelastic, as in our model (see e.g. Adelino et al., 2012; 
with LTV 85 and above. To map this into the LTI policy experiment, we choose a limit above which there are 20% of 
borrowers (after deducting the flow allowance).
31 The BoE introduced an LTI policy of 4.5 with an allowance of 15% in 2014 (see e.g. Bank of England, 2019). 
This policy was not calibrated to reduce the mortgage lending at the time when it was introduced. Instead, its aim was 
to provide the insurance against the risk of a loosening in underwriting standards and an increase in the household 
indebtedness in the future. In contrast, we calibrate the policy experiment in this paper to have a marked effect on the 
housing market to demonstrate the capabilities of our model. We, therefore, do not seek to assess the effects of the BoE’s 
LTI policy.
32 By aggregate effects we mean differences in the long-term averages of the relevant variables. The averages can 
be interpreted as the long-run equilibrium values around which the variables fluctuate. Therefore, the values shown 
should not be seen as a short-run impact of the introduction of the policies.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

404 A. Carro et al.
Figure 3. Key variables in housing booms and busts 
Favara and Imbs, 2015), so we would expect the introduction of borrowing caps to reduce credit 
supply and house prices.
5.2 Housing booms and busts
While the previous section investigated changes to the long-run averages of several model vari-
ables due to the borrowing limits, this section considers how these variables are influenced by the 
policy experiments depending on the house price cycle. This matters as researchers are not only 
interested in how policies affect the averages of variables of interest, but also whether they can 
mitigate volatility. We first identify housing boom and bust periods in the model by computing 
the trend component of the HPI using a Hodrick–Prescott filter.33 We determine where this trend 
component is increasing or decreasing to identify boom and bust episodes. We then condition the 
variables we investigate below on these episodes.
We focus on three variables: mortgage approvals, the number of housing transactions, and 
house prices. The policy experiments mitigate fluctuations in these variables across the house 
price cycle, i.e. they tend to be lower during booms but higher during busts. Figure 3 expresses 
this as the percentage deviation from the average over the cycle for a given experiment. Under 
the benchmark of no policy, mortgage approvals are higher by about 34% in booms and lower 
by 34% in busts.34 But when the LTV and LTI policies are in place, these numbers fall to 26% 
in booms and −26% in busts, respectively. Housing transactions follow a similar pattern: with 
the policies in place, they increase by about 5–6% points less during housing booms and also 
decrease less by the same margin during housing busts compared with the benchmark of no 
policy. Therefore, while the average number of housing transactions stays about constant in the 
long term as discussed in the previous section, the timing of when these transactions take place is 
influenced by constraints on the availability of credit depending on the state of the housing cycle. 
Lastly, house prices also behave in a similar way, but to a lesser degree: when the policies are in 
place, they increase by about 2.5% points less during booms and decrease by about 2.5% less 
during busts.
We can also confirm a finding by Tarne et al. (2021). When looking at the level of house prices 
(see Table 4), the policies are most binding when house prices are exuberant, i.e. during booms: 
the LTV limit and the LTI limit lead to a drop of 5.1% and 6.1%, respectively, in average house 
prices, compared with the benchmark of no policy. But the policy experiments have less of an 
effect when house prices are relatively low, i.e. during busts: they only lead to a drop of 0.3% and 
1.4%, respectively, in average house prices. That is, most of the effects of the policy experiments 
on house prices take place during housing booms. 
To corroborate our finding that the policy experiments mitigate fluctuations across the cycle, 
we consider two additional variables: credit growth and house price growth (not shown). Credit 
33 We use a smoothing parameter, 𝜆, of 100,000.
34 All numbers behave broadly symmetrically in booms and busts, although it should be kept in mind that the 
long-term averages are different for each policy experiment, in line with the results in Table 3.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 405
T able 4. Effect of policy experiments on house prices
Aggregate Boom Bust
Benchmark (£ 1000) 171.8 201.5 141.7
LTV cap (£ 1000) 166.5 191.1 141.3
Change with respect to benchmark −3.1% −5.1% −0.3%
LTI cap (£ 1000) 164.7 189.1 139.7
Change with respect to benchmark −4.1% −6.1% −1.4%
Note: These statistics are averages over 50 Monte Carlo simulations.
T able 5. Average LTV and LTI ratios by borrower types
Benchmark LTV cap LTI cap
Average LTV (%)
Owner-occupier 65.8 63.6 63.3
FTB 68 64.4 65.2
HM 62.8 62.5 60.7
Average LTI
Owner-occupier 2.8 2.7 2.4
FTB 2.7 2.4 2.2
HM 3.1 3.1 2.7
Note: These statistics are averages over 50 Monte Carlo simulations.
growth is higher during house price booms and lower during house price bust, consistent with 
the literature (e.g. Jordà et al., 2016 ). The policy experiments have a mitigating effect on 
this credit cycle: the average credit growth rate falls from about 3% to 2.3% for LTV and 
2.4% for LTI during housing booms and increases from −2.9% to −2.3% for both LTV and 
LTI during housing busts. House price growth follows a similar pattern as credit growth. As 
expected, it is lower (negative) in busts and higher (positive) in booms. Hence, these macro-
prudential policy experiments reduce fluctuations in credit growth and house price growth over
the cycle.35
In summary, the LTV and LTI policy experiments reduce the availability of mortgage loans, 
which is reflected in lower debt ratios and house prices. But they also reduce fluctuations in many 
of these variables across the house price cycle. While in the aggregate the policy experiments have 
little influence on variables that are determined by structural factors such as the number of hous-
ing transactions, they may still have the desired effect of reducing the amplitude of fluctuations 
over the cycle.36
5.3 Cross-sectional effects
In addition to analyzing the effects of policy experiments in mitigating the cyclical behavior of 
economic variables, it is important to understand how policy measures affect different types of 
households from a cross-sectional perspective. This is because policy experiments might have 
disproportionate or unintended side effects on certain groups of households.
LTV and LTI distributions. We begin by investigating the average of the LTV distribution. As 
shown in Table 5, the average LTV ratio for owner-occupier mortgages is around 2 pp lower 
when the LTV and the LTI caps are in place. The adjustment is larger for FTBs than for HMs. 
35 As an alternative metric, we can calculate how the policy experiments affect the standard deviation of credit 
growth and house price growth. In the case of credit growth, it falls from about 4.2% to 3.3% for the LTV cap and 
3.5% for the LTI cap. In the case of house price growth, it declines from 3.77% to 3.36% for the LTV limit and 3.56% 
for the LTI limit.
36 There is no clear mitigation of the cyclical pattern for the LTV and LTI ratios. We only find a reduction in the 
cycle for the LTI ratio under the LTI policy experiment. One explanation is that many variables, such as loan amounts 
and house prices, are affected by the policy experiments to a similar degree, so the ratios of such variables tend to 
remain relatively stable. One exception is income, which is exogenous in our model and could, therefore, explain the 
behavior of the LTI ratio under the LTI policy experiment.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

406 A. Carro et al.
Figure 4. Share of high-LTV lending by borrower type 
This is to be expected as FTBs are more bound by the policy experiments, especially in terms of 
the LTV limit.37 Under the LTI cap, the average LTI ratio decreases by 4 pp, affecting the average 
FTB and HM LTI ratios similarly.
By virtue of the heterogeneity embodied in ABMs, we can perform a more granular investi-
gation across the whole distribution of the LTV and LTI ratios. This is particularly relevant as 
financial risks are often disproportionately concentrated in high-LTV and high-LTI loans, i.e. in 
the tail of the respective distributions. 38 In other words, focusing on the average LTV and LTI 
ratios to assess financial stability risks may give an incomplete picture of the true riskiness of the 
bank’s mortgage portfolio and of the effects that policy measures may have.
Figure 4 shows the upper end of the LTV distribution, the “tail” (for LTV ratios of 75–80%, 
80–85%, and above 85%), in the benchmark case and when the LTV policy is in effect. The 
share of high-LTV mortgages for FTBs (with an LTV ratio above 75%) decreases from 52% to 
45%. The share of mortgages with an LTV ratio between 80% and 85% increases significantly 
and accounts for two-thirds of all high-LTV lending above 75% when the LTV policy is in place. 
For HMs, the share of high-LTV lending (above 75%) is about the same as in the benchmark 
case, with the 75–80% and 80–85% LTV bands absorbing the capped 85 + LTV shares about 
proportionally. 
Similarly, Figure 5 shows the tail of the LTI distribution (for LTI ratios of 3.0–3.35, 3.35–4.0, 
and above 4.0). It is important to recall that the LTI policy experiment is a soft limit, so there are 
mortgages with an LTI ratio above the policy limit of 3.35, while there are no mortgages above 
the hard LTV cap of 85%. Several findings stand out. First, the impact of the LTI cap is stronger 
for FTBs than HMs as the share of high-LTI lending decreases by 22 pp for FTBs compared to a 
16 pp reduction for HMs.39 Second, the bank allocates a higher share of high-LTI loans to HMs 
than FTBs when the policy is in place as the share of HMs in high-LTI lending increases from 
50% to 70%. Third, there is clustering right below the soft limit of 3.35 as many aspiring FTBs 
and HMs are pushed just below the limit. A similar bunching effect can be observed for the UK’s 
LTI policy introduced in 2014 (Bank of England, 2019). 
37 Wong et al. (2011) find that mortgage insurance policies (MIPs) can mitigate the impact of an LTV policy on 
borrowers. MIPs allow mortgage lenders to issue mortgages with LTV ratios above the maximum threshold. These 
policies aim to protect lenders from credit losses on the loans above the maximum LTV threshold in the case of default 
and transfer the risk from lenders to insurers. In the UK, such MIPs are not currently available; therefore, we do not 
investigate this option.
38 For example, Aron and Muellbauer (2016)  assess the proportion of mortgages in negative equity, i.e. with an 
LTV ratio above 100%, as a determinant of repossessions and arrears.
39 The share of high-LTI lending (an LTI ratio greater than or equal to 3.35) for FTBs decreases from 30.3 to 7.9 
and for HMs decreases from 42.3 to 25.9 (i.e. the top two segments of the stacked bars in each graph).
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 407
Figure 5. Share of high-LTI lending by borrower type 
Figure 6. LTV distributions when LTI cap is in place 
We go one step further by analyzing how LTI and LTV ratios are jointly affected by housing 
policy experiments, not just in isolation. Figure 6 shows LTV distributions for FTBs and HMs. 
Each chart presents LTV distributions for the benchmark case and when the LTI cap is in place. 
Introducing an LTI cap also shifts the LTV distribution to the left for both FTBs and HMs, with 
the effect somewhat stronger for the latter. The share of high-LTV mortgages (i.e. LTV ratio above 
75%) decreases from 52% to 46% for FTBs and from 28% to 22% for HMs. This demonstrates 
an important lesson for the calibration of policies: a given policy does not only act on the risk 
metric it is directly targeting (such as the LTI ratio in the case of an LTI policy), but it may also 
affect other risk characteristics, such as high-LTV lending, as a side effect. Therefore, for a given 
desired reduction of risk, a holistic view of the joint distribution of risk characteristics is needed 
to ensure an appropriate calibration of an individual policy. 
Housing transactions. The number of housing transactions in the aggregate does not change 
significantly under the different policy experiments (Table 3). Figure 7, however, indicates a com-
positional change as the share of transactions by buyer types differs across policy experiments. 
With the LTV (LTI) policy, the share of FTBs (HMs) decreases and the share of BTL investors’ 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

408 A. Carro et al.
Figure 7 . Change in housing sale transactions 
house purchases increases. We also see a similar pattern with mortgage approvals,40 indicating a 
spillover effect of owner-occupier housing policy experiments to the BTL mortgage market. 
We further investigate the compositional changes in risky lending, in particular whether hous-
ing policy experiments lead to changes in the proportion of cheap vs. expensive houses funded 
by high-LTV and high-LTI mortgages. This is relevant from a financial stability perspective, as 
the exposure of the bank to a risky loan (for a given LTV and LTI ratio) increases with the 
value of the house. To understand the compositional changes in risky lending and whether cer-
tain housing transactions are affected disproportionately by housing policy experiments, we first 
group the pool of all owner-occupier house transactions financed by mortgages into five house 
price quintiles, i.e. from cheapest (HPQ1) to most expensive (HPQ5) houses. Then we calculate, 
for each quintile, the number of high-LTV (75% and above), respectively high-LTI (above 3.35), 
transactions divided by the total number of high-LTV, respectively high-LTI, transactions across 
all quintiles.41
Figure 8 shows that in the benchmark case 25% of high-LTV (LTI) lending finances the pur-
chase of houses in the lowest (highest) house price quintile. While the share of high-LTV lending 
decreases monotonically between the lowest and the highest house price quintiles, the share of 
high-LTI lending increases monotonically. In the high-LTV lending, FTBs constitute a higher share 
compared to HMs in all house price quintiles. On the other hand, the share of HMs increases 
over house price quintiles for high-LTI lending. 
Figure 9 shows how this share differs, for each house price quintile, when the LTV/LTI policy is 
in place compared with the benchmark of no policy. Apart from the aggregate result for all owner-
occupiers, the split by FTBs and HMs is also shown, allowing us to investigate the compositional 
changes in risky lending. 42 The figure reveals that FTBs lose some of their access to high-risk 
mortgages when the policies are in place, while HMs increase their access. The extent of this loss 
of access depends on house prices: the more expensive a property becomes, the less likely FTBs 
are to secure a high-risk mortgage. The reason is that FTBs are more constrained than HMs in 
40 Regarding mortgage approvals, the LTV cap hits mostly FTBs relative to HMs, and there is a significant increase 
in mortgage approvals to BTL investors. With the LTI soft limit, the mortgage approval numbers are slightly lower 
for both FTBs and HMs; however, advances to BTL investors increase by about 5%. This suggests that even a small 
decrease in owner-occupier mortgages could have a significant knock-on effect on the BTL mortgage market, which is 
a relatively small segment of the overall market.
41 The formula used to calculate these shares is: the number of mortgages (respectively, housing transactions) in a 
given house price quintile financed by high-LTV (LTI) lending divided by the total number of high-LTV (LTI) mortgages 
(respectively, housing transactions). See Figure 2 (e–f) for a comparison of the benchmark case with real data.
42 Note that for each house price quintile, the purple and blue bars add up to the green bar. Also across 
HPQ1–HPQ5, the green bars add up the zero.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 409
Figure 8. Share of high-LTV and high-LTI lending by house price quintile and borrower type 
Figure 9. Change in the share of high-LTV and high-LTI lending by house price quintile 
terms of their income and savings; therefore, when policy limits tighten, FTBs are more likely to 
be affected. The only time when FTBs can increase their share of high-risk loans is in the lowest 
house price quintile under the LTV policy, where they are least likely to be constrained relative 
to HMs. In the aggregate, the share of risky lending decreases for higher house prices under 
the LTV policy, but increases under the LTI policy. This is because FTBs are more prevalent in 
the high-LTV market, while HMs dominate the high-LTI market in high house price quintiles 
(Figure 8).
In summary, housing policy experiments affect certain types of borrowers and house buyers 
disproportionately, with FTBs generally being affected more. We confirm that there is bunching 
just below the LTI policy limit. The policy experiments affect various risk metrics simultaneously, 
not just the one they are targeting directly. The policy experiments cause a shift of housing trans-
actions away from owner-occupiers to the BTL sector. And the more expensive the property, the 
more HMs have access to the available pool of high-risk mortgages relative to FTBs.
5.4 Spillovers to the BTL sector and rental market
In the previous section, we showed that both housing policy experiments lead to a decline in 
owner-occupier mortgage approvals/housing transactions and to an increase in BTL mortgage 
approvals/housing transactions. The results are more prominent when the LTV cap is in place. 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

410 A. Carro et al.
Figure 10. Change in the tenure and distribution of the number of BTL properties 
A decrease (increase) in FTB (BTL) purchases indicates that the housing policy experiments, in 
particular the LTV limit, could also have an impact on the rental market as the house ownership 
structure changes.
In the benchmark case, the share of owner-occupiers (renters) is 54% (38%). Figure 10 (a) 
shows that the share of owner-occupiers (renters) is lower (higher) when housing policies are in 
place. The LTV policy experiment leads to a 1.6% point decrease in the ownership rate, moving 
the equivalent of 422 thousand households (out of 26 million) from home ownership to the rental 
market. 
Changing our perspective from households to houses, the share of the housing stock held 
by BTL investors is higher by 2 pp when the LTV cap is in place (not shown). Given that the 
share of BTL investors does not change ( Figure 10 (a)), this indicates that the distribution of 
the number of properties owned by BTL investors might change when housing policies are in 
place. Figure 10 (b) shows that the share of BTL investors who have multiple BTL properties, in 
particular between five and nine properties, is higher when the LTV cap is in place. This suggests 
that BTL investors with bigger portfolios may benefit from the introduction of housing policies 
which only target owner-occupiers. The impact of the LTI policy experiment on BTL investors’ 
portfolios is qualitatively similar to the LTV policy experiment, but less pronounced.43
Policy experiments on owner-occupier mortgages limit the number of FTBs who can get on 
the housing ladder, therefore leading to an increase in rental demand. At the same time, these 
housing policy experiments also increase the rental supply as BTL investors increase their housing 
portfolio. A priori, this should increase the number of rental transactions, while the effect on 
prices (i.e. rents) is ambivalent. Indeed, Table 6 shows that the number of rental transactions 
increases. The average monthly rent increases when the LTV cap is in place as, based on our 
model calibration, the increase in demand dominates the higher supply. However, in case of the 
LTI policy experiment, the increase in supply and demand is more balanced, leading to a smaller 
increase in rental transactions and a very small decrease in rents. The rental yields are higher 
with both policy experiments due to significant decreases in house prices. Interestingly, the rent-
to-income ratio is slightly lower with the policies in place. This is because the marginal tenant, 
who would be a FTB without a housing policy but ends up renting with a policy, has a relatively 
higher income than the other tenants who would be renters even without a housing policy in 
place.
43 Additionally, we look into the effect of housing policy experiments on housing wealth. The share of housing 
wealth owned by the top 10% of households increases under the LTV and LTI policy experiments by 0.71 pp and 0.77 
pp, respectively. The share of housing wealth owned by the bottom 50% of households decreases by 0.33 pp under the 
LTV policy experiment and by 0.15 pp under the LTI policy experiment.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 411
T able 6. Rental market indicators
Benchmark LTV cap LTI cap
No. of rental transactions 327,662 351,564 337,221
Monthly rent (£) 526 534 523
Rent-to-income ratio (%) 25.1 24.8 24.8
Rental yield (%) 4.2 4.5 4.3
Note: These statistics are averages over 50 Monte Carlo simulations.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we develop an ABM of the UK housing market. We demonstrate the usefulness of 
this approach for research and policy by exploiting the heterogeneous nature of households along 
multiple dimensions, including their income, their home ownership status, or their characteristics 
as borrowers, among others. This allows us to identify which categories of agents may be partic-
ularly affected by different housing policy experiments. This level of granularity is informative as 
it facilitates the identification of unintended side effects of policies, the analysis of spillover effects 
to other markets segments, and the assessment of the full distributions of variables of interest.
While the model allows for a rich analysis of the housing market and the measures affecting it, 
we limit ourselves, in the interest of space, to two policy experiments, a hard LTV limit and a soft 
LTI limit. We highlight a range of effects these two policy experiments have on the housing mar-
ket, with a particular focus on house price booms and busts as well as sub-groups of households 
such as FTBs, HMs, and renters.
Among the several results presented in this paper, three findings stand out. First, the housing 
policy experiments tend to mitigate the house price cycle. That is, variables such as housing 
transactions, mortgage approvals, and house prices tend to be lower during booms but higher 
during busts compared with the benchmark of no policy. The reason is that the availability of 
credit and therefore leverage is reduced, leaving the market less volatile. Second, a given policy can 
impact several different risk metrics, including the ones it does not target directly. For example, 
an LTI limit can also reduce the LTV ratios available for the same group of borrowers. This 
effect should be taken into account when calibrating any housing market policy to achieve the 
desired overall reduction in risk. Third, the policy experiments affect different types of households 
differently. Given the nature of the policy experiments performed in this paper (i.e. targeting 
owner-occupiers but not the BTL sector), BTL investors tend to benefit at the expense of owner-
occupiers. FTBs are generally more negatively impacted than HMs, for example by losing some 
access to high-risk mortgages. These compositional changes also spill over to the rental market. 
This happens through two channels: the policies prevent some FTBs and HMs from securing 
sufficiently large mortgages to purchase properties, therefore increasing demand in the rental 
sector. The properties are instead absorbed by the BTL sector, which increases the supply of houses 
on offer in the rental market. The policy experiments therefore lead to a compositional shift in 
home ownership away from the owner-occupier to the BTL sector. Based on our calibration for 
the UK, demand for rental properties increases by more than their supply in case of the LTV 
policy experiment, thereby raising both the number of rental transactions and average rents. In 
case of the LTI policy experiment, the increase in supply and demand is more balanced, leading 
to a smaller increase in rental transactions and a very small decrease in rents.
We have left several potential extensions of the model to future research. First, the housing 
model should be embedded in a macro framework in order to be able to assess the model dynam-
ics in a general equilibrium setting. This could be achieved by merging the model into one of 
the ABM families described in the literature review above. In particular, the lack of monetary 
policy in our model limits the role of the interest rate as an endogenous determinant of house 
price and credit cycles (even though there is an ad hoc countercyclical interest rate mechanism 
present). Existing ABMs that assess the role of monetary policy in a macro framework include, 
for instance, Popoyan et al. (2017) and Alexandre and Lima (2020). Furthermore, incorporating 
a more detailed banking sector into the model could shed light on understanding heterogeneous 
responses of banks and their risk-taking incentives and balance-sheet adjustments in response 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

412 A. Carro et al.
to macroprudential housing policies. This would complement, for example, the empirical analy-
sis by Acharya et al. (2020) who find that the LTV and LTI limits introduced in Ireland in 2015 
resulted in lenders adjusting their portfolios and increasing their risk exposure to corporate credit 
and holdings of securities. Similarly, Ely et al. (2021) present evidence that macroprudential poli-
cies, including LTV and DTI ratios, can mitigate the bank risk as measured by the Z-score, mainly 
by limiting the leverage. Furthermore, Peydr ́o et al. (2020) show that as a response to the imple-
mentation of an LTI flow limit in the UK in 2014, constrained lenders decreased the proportion 
of their high-LTI lending, and this reduction affected the low-income borrowers more.
Second, we have only considered two types of policy experiments in this paper. Future research 
could focus on other measures such as debt-service-to-income limits, tax policies, or policies 
conditional on the state of the housing market. A growing literature has focused on the impact of 
macroprudential bank capital requirements, such as Cincotti et al. (2012b), Krug et al. (2015), 
Popoyan et al. (2017), Van Der Hoog and Dawid (2019) , Alexandre and Lima (2020) , and 
Popoyan et al. (2020), although to our knowledge no studies have comprehensively assessed a 
combination of monetary policy as well as macroprudential capital and housing instruments. 
Other policies could comprise credit quotas and credit rationing, as discussed by van der Hoog 
(2018).
Third, we have not explicitly considered how to calibrate policies optimally in our analysis. 
A starting point could be to specify different objective functions of a policy-maker based on the 
observable variables and determine the best combination of policies, which maximize the value 
of the respective objective function. A welfare criterion is relatively difficult to define in ABMs, 
but could provide a worthwhile subject of future research.
A final potential avenue of research would be to consider spatial features explicitly in the 
model. In particular, expanding it to include different regions, with their specific house price 
dynamics, would allow one to study the heterogeneous impact of a given macroprudential policy 
across these regions. Furthermore, this improvement would open the way for an exhaustive anal-
ysis of affordability, taking into account the spatial heterogeneities in the distributions of income, 
wealth, and housing prices.
Acknowledgements
As mentioned in the Introduction, this paper grew out of a Bank of England Staff Working 
Paper (#619), and we would particularly like to thank our collaborators Rafa Baptista, Katie 
Low, and Daniel Tang. We would also like to thank Robert Axtell, Marco Bardoscia, Sebastian 
Barnes, Philippe Bracke, Leif Brubakk, Chris Carroll, Gennaro Catapano, Graeme Cokayne, 
Allan Davids, Co-Pierre Georg, Andy Haldane, William Hynes, Sujit Kapadia, Junior Maih, 
Fergal McCann, Bence Mér�, John Muellbauer, Mauro Napoletano, Marco Pangallo, Donovan 
Platt, Lilit Popoyan, Mikhail Prokopenko, David Pugh, Andrea Roventini, Ruben Tarne, Nikolett 
Vág ́o, Matthew Waldron, and Gavin Wallis for their support and valuable comments. Georgia 
Papamarkidou provided excellent research assistance. We would also like to express our gratitude 
to the participants of Workshop on Economics with Heterogeneous Interacting Agents (WEHIA) 
2017 and the 2017 Bank of England and Office of Financial Research joint conference as well 
as workshops at the Bank of England, the Central Bank of Hungary, the Central Bank of Ire-
land, Bank of Russia, Norges Bank, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD), Essex University, and the Alan Turing Institute for their valuable comments.
Funding
A.C. was partially supported by the UK Engineering and Physical Science Research Council under 
grant EP/N017064/1: Multi-scale Infrastructure Systems Analytics.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 413
Disclaimer
Any views expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and should not be attributed 
to the Banco de España, the Eurosystem, or the Bank of England or their policy committees. The 
analysis presented in this article uses HM Land Registry data © Crown copyright and database 
right 2021. These data are licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0.
References
Acharya, V. V., K., Bergant, M., Crosignani, T., Eisert and F. J., McCann (2020), ‘The anatomy of the transmission 
of macroprudential policies,’ Working Paper 27292 NBER. 10.3386/w27292.
Adelino, M., A., Schoar and F., Severino (2012), ‘Credit supply and house prices: evidence from mortgage market 
segmentation,’ Working Paper 17832 NBER. 10.3386/w17832.
Alexandre, M. and G. T., Lima (2020), ‘Combining monetary policy and prudential regulation: an agent-based 
modeling approach,’ Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination, 15(2), 385–411.
Aron, J. and J., Muellbauer (2016), ‘Modelling and forecasting mortgage delinquency and foreclosure in the 
UK,’ Journal of Urban Economics, 94, 32–53. 10.1016/j.jue.2016.03.005.
Ashraf, Q., B., Gershman and P., Howitt (2017), ‘Banks, market organization, and macroeconomic performance: 
an agent-based computational analysis,’ Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 135, 143–180. 
10.1016/j.jebo.2016.12.023.
Assenza, T., D. D., Gatti and J., Grazzini (2015), ‘Emergent dynamics of a macroeconomic agent based model 
with capital and credit,’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 50, 5–28. 10.1016/j.jedc.2014.07.001.
Association of Residential Letting Agents. (2013), ‘ARLA Members Survey of the Private Rented Sector (Fourth 
Quarter 2013) Technical report,’ ARLA.
Axtell, R., D., Farmer, J., Geanakoplos, P., Howitt, E., Carrella, B., Conlee, J., Goldstein, M., Hendrey, P., 
Kalikman, D., Masad, N., Palmer and C. -Y., Yang (2014), ‘An agent-based model of the housing market 
bubble in metropolitan washington, DC,’ In Deutsche Bundesbank’s Spring Conference on Housing markets 
and the macroeconomy: Challenges for monetary policy and financial stability, pp. 5–6.
Bank of England. (2018), A loan-level [data collection] for buy-to-let lending, 2017-2018. [data collection]. Bank 
of England (BoE).
Bank of England. (2019), Financial Stability Report - December 2019 . Financial Stability Report Bank of 
England.
Bank of England/NMG. (2018), Bank of England/NMG household survey data, 2014-2018. [data collection]. 
Bank of England (BoE).
Baptista, R., J. D., Farmer, M., Hinterschweiger, K., Low, D., Tang and A., Uluc (2016), ‘Macroprudential 
policy in an agent-based model of the UK housing market,’ Staff Working Paper 619, Bank of England. 
10.2139/ssrn.2850414.
Caiani, A., A., Godin, E., Caverzasi, M., Gallegati, S., Kinsella and J. E., Stiglitz (2016), ‘Agent based-stock flow 
consistent macroeconomics: Towards a benchmark model,’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 69, 
375–408. 10.1016/j.jedc.2016.06.001.
Catapano, G., F., Franceschi, M., Loberto and V., Michelangeli (2021), ‘Macroprudential policy analysis via 
an agent based model of the real estate sector,’ Temi di Discussione (Working Paper) 1338, Bank of Italy. 
10.2139/ssrn.3891583.
Chen, Z. and T., Lux (2018), ‘Estimation of sentiment effects in financial markets: A simulated method of 
moments approach,’ Computational Economics, 52(3), 711–744.
Cincotti, S., M., Raberto and A., Teglio (2012a), ‘The EURACE macroeconomic model and simulator’ Eds.
(M. Aoki, K. Binmore, S. Deakin and H. Gintis), Complexity and Institutions: Markets, Norms and 
Corporations. Palgrave Macmillan UK: pp. 81–106.
Cincotti, S., M., Raberto and A., Teglio (2012b), ‘Macroprudential policies in an agent-based artificial economy,’ 
Revue de l’OFCE, 2012/5(No 124) pp. 205–234. 10.3917/reof.124.0205.
Cokayne, G. (2019), ‘The Effects of Macro-prudential Policies on House Price Cycles in an Agent-based Model 
of the Danish Housing Market,’ Working Paper 138 Danmarks Nationalbank.
Dawid, H. and D., Delli Gatti (2018), ‘Agent-Based Macroeconomics,’ Handbook of Computational Economics, 
4, 63–156.
Dawid, H., S., Gemkow, P., Harting, S., Van der Hoog and M., Neugart (2012), ‘The Eurace@Unibi Model: An 
Agent-Based Macroeconomic Model for Economic Policy Analysis,’ Bielefeld Working Papers in Economics 
and Management pp. 05–2012.
Dawid, H., P., Harting and M., Neugart (2014), ‘Economic convergence: Policy implications from a heteroge-
neous agent model,’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 44, 54–80.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

414 A. Carro et al.
Dawid, H., P., Harting, S., Van der Hoog and M., Neugart (2019), ‘Macroeconomics with heterogeneous agent 
models: fostering transparency, reproducibility and replication,’ Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 29(1), 
467–538.
Delli Gatti, D., S., Desiderio, E., Gaffeo, P., Cirillo and M., Gallegati (2011), Macroeconomics From the Bottom-
up, Vol. 1, Springer Science and Business Media.
Department for Communities and Local Government (2013), English Housing Survey, 2011-2012: Household 
Data. [data collection]. SN: 7362 UK Data Service.
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Office for National Statistics (2020), Living Costs and 
Food Survey, 2011, (2nd Edn) UK Data Service: [data collection]. SN: 7272.
Dosi, G., G., Fagiolo and A., Roventini (2010), ‘Schumpeter meeting Keynes: A policy-friendly model of 
endogenous growth and business cycles,’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(9), 1748–1767.
Dosi, G. and A., Roventini (2019), ‘More is different. and complex! the case for agent-based macroeconomics,’ 
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 29(1), 1–37.
Ely, R. A., B. M., Tabak and A. M., Teixeira (2021), ‘The transmission mechanisms of macroprudential policies 
on bank risk,’ Economic Modelling, 94, 598–630.
Evans, B. P., K., Glavatskiy, M. S., Harré and M., Prokopenko (2021), ‘The impact of social influence in Aus-
tralian real estate: market forecasting with a spatial agent-based model,’ Journal of Economic Interaction 
and Coordination, 1–53.
Fabretti, A. (2013), ‘On the problem of calibrating an agent based model for financial markets,’ Journal of 
Economic Interaction and Coordination, 8(2), 277–293.
Fagiolo, G., M., Guerini, F., Lamperti, A., Moneta and A., Roventini (2019), ‘Validation of agent-based models 
in economics and finance,’ In Computer Simulation Validation, Springer: pp. 763–787.
Fagiolo, G. and A., Roventini (2017), ‘Macroeconomic Policy in DSGE and Agent-Based Models Redux: New 
Developments and Challenges Ahead,’ Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 20, 1.
Farmer, J. D. and D., Foley (2009), ‘The economy needs agent-based modelling,’ Nature, 460(7256), 685–686.
Favara, G. and J., Imbs (2015), ‘Credit supply and the price of housing,’ American Economic Review, 105(3), 
958–92.
Filatova, T. (2015), ‘Empirical agent-based land market: Integrating adaptive economic behavior in urban land-
use models,’ Computers, Environment and Urban systems, 54, 397–413.
Financial Conduct Authority (2018), Mortgage Product Sales Data, 2005-2018 . [data collection]. Financial 
Conduct Authority (FCA).
Franke, R. (2009), ‘Applying the method of simulated moments to estimate a small agent-based asset pricing 
model,’ Journal of Empirical Finance, 16(5), 804–815.
Franke, R. and F., Westerhoff (2012), ‘Structural stochastic volatility in asset pricing dynamics: Estimation and 
model contest,’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(8), 1193–1211.
Ge, J. (2013), ‘Who creates housing bubbles? an agent-based study,’ In International Workshop on Multi-Agent 
Systems and Agent-Based Simulation Springer: pp. 143–150.
Ge, J. (2017), ‘Endogenous rise and collapse of housing price: an agent-based model of the housing market’, 
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 62, 182–198.
Geanakoplos, J., R., Axtell, J. D., Farmer, P., Howitt, B., Conlee, J., Goldstein, M., Hendrey, N. M., Palmer and 
C. -Y., Yang (2012), ‘Getting at Systemic Risk via an Agent-Based Model of the Housing Market’, American 
Economic Review, 102(3), 53–58.
Gilli, M. and P., Winker (2003), ‘A global optimization heuristic for estimating agent based models,’ Computa-
tional Statistics and Data Analysis, 42(3), 299–312.
Gillingham, R. (1980), ‘Estimating the user cost of owner-occupied housing,’ Monthly Labor Review, 103(2), 
31–35.
Glavatskiy, K. S., M., Prokopenko, A., Carro, P., Ormerod and M., Harre (2021), ‘Explaining herding and 
volatility in the cyclical price dynamics of urban housing markets using a large-scale agent-based model,’ SN 
Business and Economics, 1(6), 1–21.
Guerrero, O. A. (2020), ‘Decentralized markets and the emergence of housing wealth inequality,’ Computers, 
Environment and Urban Systems, 84, 101541.
Haas, A. and C., Jaeger (2005), ‘Agents, Bayes, and climatic risks-a modular modelling approach,’ Advances in 
Geosciences, 4, 3–7.
Haldane, A. G. and A. E., Turrell (2019), ‘Drawing on different disciplines: macroeconomic agent-based models,’ 
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 29(1), 39–66.
Huang, Q., D. C., Parker, S., Sun and T., Filatova (2013), ‘Effects of agent heterogeneity in the presence of a 
land-market: A systematic test in an agent-based laboratory,’ Computers, Environment and Urban systems, 
41, 188–203.
Jordà, O., M., Schularick and A. M., Taylor (2016), ‘The great mortgaging: housing finance, crises and business 
cycles,’ Economic Policy, 31(85), 107–152.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 415
Kaplan, G., B., Moll and G. L., Violante (2018), ‘Monetary policy according to HANK,’ American Economic 
Review, 108(3), 697–743.
Krug, S., M., Lengnick and H. -W., Wohltmann (2015), ‘The impact of basel iii on financial (in) stability: an 
agent-based credit network approach,’ Quantitative Finance, 15(12), 1917–1932.
Laliotis, D., A., Buesa, M., Leber and J., Poblaci ́on (2020), ‘An agent-based model for the assessment of LTV 
caps,’ Quantitative Finance, 20(10), 1721–1748.
Mandel, A., C., Jaeger, S., Fuerst, W., Lass, D., Lincke, F., Meissner, F., Pablo-Marti and S., Wolf (2010), 
‘Agent-based dynamics in disaggregated growth models,’ Working Paper 2010. 77, CES.
Méro, B. and N., Váǵo (2018), ‘Keresletvezérelt lakáspiaci modell a lakáshitelezést szabályoźo makroprudenciális 
eszk ̈oz ̈ok tanulmányozására,’ K ̈ozgazdasági Szemle, 65(11), 1115–1153.
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (2019), English Private Landlord Survey, 2018. [data 
collection]. SN: 8455 UK Data Service.
Moneyfacts Group PLC (2011), MoneyFacts Analyser: Mortgage Products, 2011. [data collection]. Moneyfacts 
Group PLC.
Office for National Statistics (2009), Wealth in Great Britain, main results from the Wealth and Assets Survey 
2006/2008. Technical report Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive.
Office for National Statistics, Social Survey Division (2022), Wealth and Assets Survey, Waves 1-5 and Rounds 
5-7, 2006-2020. (15th Edn) UK Data Service: [data collection]. SN: 7215.
Ozel, B., R. C., Nathanael, M., Raberto, A., Teglio and S., Cincotti (2019), ‘Macroeconomic implications of 
mortgage loan requirements: an agent-based approach,’ Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination, 
14(1), 7–46.
Pangallo, M., J. -P., Nadal and A., Vignes (2019), ‘Residential income segregation: A behavioral model of the 
housing market,’ Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 159, 15–35.
Parker, D. C. and T., Filatova (2008), ‘A conceptual design for a bilateral agent-based land market with 
heterogeneous economic agents,’ Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32(6), 454–463.
Peydr ́o, J. -L., F., Rodriguez-Tous, J., Tripathy and A., Uluc (2020), Macroprudential policy, mortgage cycles and 
distributional effects: Evidence from the UK. Bank of England working papers 866 Bank of England.
Platt, D. and T., Gebbie (2018), ‘Can agent-based models probe market microstructure?’ Physica A: Statistical 
Mechanics and its Applications, 503, 1092–1106.
Popoyan, L., M., Napoletano and A., Roventini (2017), ‘Taming macroeconomic instability: Monetary 
and macro-prudential policy interactions in an agent-based model,’ Journal of Economic Behavior and 
Organization, 134, 117–140.
Popoyan, L., M., Napoletano and A., Roventini (2020), ‘Winter is possibly not coming: Mitigating financial 
instability in an agent-based model with interbank market,’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 
117, 103937.
Seppecher, P., I. L., Salle and D., Lang (2019), ‘Is the market really a good teacher?,’ Journal of Evolutionary 
Economics, 29(6), 299–335.
Seppecher, P., I. L., Salle and M., Lavoie (2018), ‘What drives markups? Evolutionary pricing in an agent-based 
stock-flow consistent macroeconomic model,’ Industrial and Corporate Change, 27(6), 1045–1067.
Tarne, R., D., Bezemer and T., Theobald (2021), ‘The Effect of Borrower-Specific Loan-to-Value Policies on 
Household Debt, Wealth Inequality and Consumption Volatility: An Agent-Based Analysis,’ IMK Working 
Paper 212, Hans-B ̈ockler-Stiftung.
van der Hoog, S. (2018), ‘The limits to credit growth: Mitigation policies and macroprudential regulations to 
foster macrofinancial stability and sustainable debt,’ Computational Economics, 52(3), 873–920.
Van Der Hoog, S. and H., Dawid (2019), ‘Bubbles, crashes, and the financial cycle: The impact of banking 
regulation on deep recessions,’ Macroeconomic Dynamics, 23(3), 1205–1246.
WhenFresh (2016), Zoopla data, 2003-2015. [data collection]. WhenFresh/Zoopla.
Wolf, S., S., Fürst, A., Mandel, W., Lass, D., Lincke, F., Pablo-Marti and C., Jaeger (2013), ‘A multi-agent model 
of several economic regions,’ Environmental Modelling and software, 44, 25–43.
Wong, E., T., Fong, K., fai Li and H., Choi (2011), ‘Loan-to-Value Ratio as a Macro-Prudential Tool - Hong 
Kong’s Experience and Cross-Country Evidence,’ Working Papers 1101, Hong Kong Monetary Authority.
Yun, T.-S. and I.-C., Moon (2020), ‘Housing Market Agent-Based Simulation with Loan-To-Value and Debt-To-
Income,’ Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 23(4), 5.
Appendix 1 Detailed Model Description
As in the main text, we use here Latin letters for identifying specific model variables and Greek 
letters for parameters, with the exception of 𝜀, which denotes a random draw from a normal 
distribution with mean 𝜀𝜇 and standard deviation 𝜀𝜎, 𝜂, which denotes a random draw from 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

416 A. Carro et al.
a distribution estimated from data, and 𝜎, which denotes the standard logistic function 𝜎(𝑥) =
1/(1 + 𝑒−𝑥). The specific values of the parameters, as well as a description of the estimation or 
calibration procedure and the data sources used, can be found in Appendix 2 by referring to the 
corresponding subsection of Section 3 or equation number.
1.1 Initial model setup
At the beginning of each simulation, the target numbers of households are created, drawing all 
relevant household characteristics from suitable distributions. Notably, households are assigned 
an initial age, an income percentile, a propensity to save, an initial financial wealth, and poten-
tially, a BTL flag and an investor type. Households are initially set to live in social housing, as 
no house has yet been created. See Appendix 1.2 for further details on the initialization of the 
different household variables when a household is created, as well as on the concept of social 
housing.
In a similar manner, a number of houses are also created at the beginning of the simulation, 
corresponding to the target ratio of houses to households and the remaining constant thereafter. 
This stock of houses is distributed at random among existing households, who will move into the 
first house they are given. Owner-occupier households—without the BTL flag—receiving more 
than one house will put the resulting extra properties for sale while also temporarily offering them 
for rent. Investor household—with the BTL flag—receiving more than one house will decide, for 
each of them, whether to keep it and add it to their portfolio or sell it, in which case they will still 
temporarily offer it for rent. As a consequence of this initialization assumption—random and free 
initial distribution of houses, a “spin-up” period is needed at the beginning of each simulation, 
such that a realistic assignment of houses and mortgages to households can be reached. While the 
model output typically stabilizes around realistic values in about 200 months, we allow the model 
to spin up for 500 months. For the purposes of processing the simulation output, the spin-up part 
of the simulation is always completely discarded.
Finally, a number of model variables requiring a pre-simulation value, such as exponential 
moving averages, are initialized as estimated from data (see Appendix 2). In particular, initial 
values are set for the exponential moving average price for each quality segment and for each of 
the two markets. These are estimated from the corresponding real price distributions, assuming 
each quality segment simply maps onto a corresponding percentile of the real price distribution. 
In this way, even if houses are initially allocated at random among the households and given for 
free (as if inherited), both initial sale and rental prices—as well as their distributions—will be 
close to the real ones, given the backward-looking ask price setting mechanism of the model (see 
Section 3.3).
1.1.1 House qualities
Each house is characterized by a single permanent parameter, its quality, which is assigned uni-
formly at random when the house is created from a discrete set of possible integer values, with 
higher values implying higher quality. The purpose of this quality parameter is to serve as a 
proxy for all possible features making houses different and, importantly, some more desirable 
than others, such as their location, size, condition, or dwelling type. Due to its uniform ran-
dom assignment and its discrete character, this parameter will effectively divide the market into 
approximately equally sized market segments, each corresponding to a given quality from its set 
of possible values. Within each of these segments, houses are indistinguishable but for their price. 
Across segments, on the contrary, houses are not only distinguishable but, most importantly, they 
can be ordered according to their quality values. In fact, this reduction of all house features into a 
single dimension allows for all households to have the exact same order of preferences regarding 
a given set of houses. This significantly simplifies the internal functioning of the market mecha-
nism (see Subsection 3.5), as a single ordered list of preferences is needed instead of a different 
one for each bidder. Moreover, it allows prices to differentiate between the various segments, 
with higher-quality segments being characterized by higher prices than lower-quality segments. 
As a consequence, the former are accessible only to wealthier households while the latter receive 
bids mostly by less affluent households, given the general preference for higher qualities. Note, 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 417
however, that this is a non-negligible simplification from the intrinsic complexity of real housing 
markets, where different households might prefer different locations, different types of dwellings, 
or even different combinations of house features. Thus, our approximation would work better 
the more amenable the features under consideration are to an objective and universal order of 
preferences. For example, at a given price level, it is usual to prefer a larger rather than a smaller 
house or a better built rather than a worse built one.
Bearing in mind the market mechanism of the model, described in Subsection 3.5, it is easy 
to see that, when the number of different quality segments considered is very small, there will be 
many failed bid–offer matches and thus fewer sales. This is due to the fact that, with fewer quality 
segments, it is harder to correctly order bidders and sellers, and so some wealthy households will 
end up buying cheap houses which are then not available for poorer households. In other words, 
fewer quality segments mean more competition for the same resources. On the contrary, when 
the number of quality segments is very large, there is very rarely any sale per quality segment per 
time step, and so market statistics suffer strong fluctuations. In view of this, we choose to have 
the maximum number of quality segments compatible with having at least, on average, one sale 
per quality segment per time step. To this end, we approximate the number of sales per month as 
the monthly sale probability for owner-occupiers multiplied by the total number of houses, which 
is itself equal to the number of households multiplied by the number of houses per household. 
Note that this assumes that the selling probability of owner-occupiers is a good approximation 
for assessing the number of new sellers per month, which is coherent with the fact that there are 
many more owner-occupiers than BTL investors. Furthermore, the approximation assumes that 
the market does not grow over time, such that the number of new sellers is similar to the number 
of sales. Given the fixed population size of the model, this must, on average, be the case. Finally, 
note that this choice for the number of quality segments ensures a proper scaling with the number 
of households in the model.
1.2 Demographics
The main goal of the demographic component of the model is to keep a constant distribution of 
age and a total number of households fluctuating around a constant target while households age. 
In other words, we are not trying to reproduce a realistic demographic path, with its associated 
population growth and progressive inversion of the age pyramid. On the contrary, we are trying 
to keep as many demographic characteristics as possible fixed at their values corresponding to a 
certain point in history (2011) while allowing for a dynamic population with household renewal 
and aging. In order to accomplish this with the least number of births and deaths, we simply 
choose a birth rate dependent on age so as to counteract the declining population in lower-
age bins as households age and a death rate dependent on age so as to counteract the growing 
population in higher-age bins as households age. The specific reasons that can lead to the creation 
of a new household, from children leaving their parents’ home to splitting due to a divorce, as 
well as those leading to the dissolution of an existing one, from merging due to marriage to the 
actual death of all the household members, are all beyond the scope of this contribution.
New households are born with all their characteristics drawn from suitable distributions. In 
particular, households are assigned:
1. An initial age of the Household Reference Person (HRP). This is drawn uniformly at ran-
dom within the edges of the age bin for which the household needs to be created, and it 
will then naturally evolve in the course of the simulation, driving the evolution of other 
household attributes. The concept of HRP, used in a number of government surveys, refers 
to the person within the household whose personal characteristics are used for character-
izing the household. In particular, the HRP is defined in the WAS (ONS, 2009) as follows: 
in households with a sole householder, that person is the HRP, while in households with 
joint householders, the person with the highest income is taken as the HRP. If more than 
one householder have exactly the same income, then the oldest one is chosen as the HRP.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

418 A. Carro et al.
2. A permanent income percentile. This is assigned uniformly at random and it will remain 
fixed throughout the household’s lifespan. Together with the household’s age, it will deter-
mine the household’s income, which will then evolve in time driven by age (see Section 3.2 
for further details).
3. A permanent propensity to save. This is assigned uniformly at random and it will remain 
fixed throughout the household’s lifespan. Together with the household’s income, it will 
determine the household’s target financial wealth. This target will then evolve in time 
driven by income—and thus driven by age—and it will be used for consumption and saving 
decisions (see Appendix 1.2.1 for further details).
4. An initial financial wealth. This is simply chosen as the target financial wealth correspond-
ing to the household’s permanent propensity to save and its initial income, itself derived 
from the household’s permanent income percentile and its initial age (see Appendix 1.2.1 
for further details).
Apart from these features, which are set for all households, a permanent BTL flag is randomly 
added to some of them, with a probability dependent on income percentile. This flag signals the 
household’s willingness to invest in BTL properties. That is, only households with this flag can 
ever buy additional properties beyond their homes to offer them on the rental market. Note, 
however, that, due to inheritances (see below), households without this flag can temporarily hold 
and rent out additional properties while they attempt to sell them. Regarding the probability of 
a household being assigned the BTL flag, since we only have data on the fraction of households 
per income percentile receiving any rental income (i.e., on the fraction of households actually 
renting properties out), we introduce a multiplier or adjustment parameter in order to account 
for households willing to do it but not yet having managed to acquire and rent out any investment 
property (see Appendix 2 for further calibration details). Finally, households receiving the BTL 
flag are also assigned an investor type, to be randomly chosen—with probabilities according to 
survey data—among capital-gains-driven, rental-income-driven, or mixed type. The investor type 
is associated with a specific intensity of the household’s interest in capital gains as opposed to the 
rental yield.
All new households are born into social housing, which we define as a temporary and free 
accommodation while they try to find a house to rent or buy. In general, this concept of social 
housing can be thought of as representing a variety of accommodation options going beyond 
the scope of the model, which focuses only on the privately sold and privately rented sectors. 
Particular examples of such situations are homelessness, living with parents, or living out of 
housing and other social benefits. Importantly, households never choose to be in social housing, 
but are put there if they fail to secure any other form of housing or as a temporary state between 
selling a house and buying or renting a new one. Since no housing payment is deducted from the 
households’ income while in social housing, one can think of it as a very simple form of in-kind 
housing benefit.
When a household dies, another randomly chosen household inherits all its properties and 
positive financial wealth net of the mortgage debt. If the deceased household had any houses 
on any market, these are first taken off the market. If it had any investment properties rented 
out, then any tenants living in the houses are evicted. Outstanding mortgages are paid off as 
much as possible from the deceased household’s financial wealth, with any further outstanding 
amount being written off. If the deceased household was renting, then the rental contract is simply 
terminated. Upon inheriting a house, (i) households currently in social housing will immediately 
move into it, (ii) renters will first terminate their rental contracts and then move into it, (iii) 
owner-occupiers will put the inherited house for sale while also temporarily offering it for rent, 
and (iv) BTL investors will decide whether to add it to their portfolio or sell it, in which case they 
will still temporarily offer it for rent.
1.2.1 Desired consumption and financial wealth
Given the model’s lack of macroeconomic dynamics and the strong influence of the financial 
wealth of households for their housing decisions, we model their desired consumption in a highly 
stylized manner, with the sole goal of leading to an accurate distribution of financial wealth 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 419
among the population. In particular, we model a household’s desired consumption C as 
𝐶 = min (max ( 1
2 (𝑤 − 𝑤t + 𝑦d) , 0) , 𝐶 max) , (A.1)
where yd is the household’s current disposable income (i.e., after tax, essential nonhousing con-
sumption, and housing expenses), w is its current financial wealth (after adding this month’s 
disposable income), wt is its target or desired level of financial wealth, as computed with the 
inverse cumulative distribution of financial wealth conditional on gross income analyzed at the 
household’s propensity to save, and Cmax is a maximum level of monthly desired consumption 
(see Appendix 2 Table A3 for estimation details). The maximum simply ensures that desired 
consumption is always positive or zero. Subtracting a monthly disposable income yd from the 
target financial wealth wt sets the former as the distance from which the household starts 
relaxing its saving behavior, thus allowing for some desired, nonessential consumption even 
before the target is reached. This, together with the factor 1/2, ensures that the household’s 
financial wealth exponentially approaches its target level, both from below and from above. 
Furthermore, this functional form also ensures that households with higher incomes consume
more.
A household’s financial wealth can increase substantially when selling a house, bringing it far 
above its target level. In order to avoid unrealistically high levels of consumption in these cases, 
we set a maximum monthly desired consumption Cmax, which we define as a fraction of the 
household’s gross annual income, estimated by focusing on the consumption levels of households 
in the 99th income percentile.
Finally, the resulting desired consumption is subtracted from the household’s current financial 
wealth. Thus, households save if their disposable income is larger than their desired consumption 
and dissave otherwise, drawing down their financial wealth.
1.3 Bankruptcy
Since the model does not seek to capture the nuances of bankruptcy dynamics (from delinquency 
to foreclosure), we simply consider any household unable to meet a payment commitment as 
directly bankrupt. Whenever this happens, we make sure all committed payments are always 
made by artificially injecting as much cash as necessary, without further action against the 
bankrupt household. In any case, due to the absence of explicit income shocks, 44 bankruptcies 
are not frequent in the model.
Among all household expenses, only housing payments can lead to bankruptcies: taxes are a 
fraction of the household’s income, essential nonhousing consumption is estimated to be below 
the minimum net income, and nonessential nonhousing consumption only affects the household’s 
financial wealth in excess of its desired level, thus never leading to negative values. While in 
principle designed for households to be able to fulfil their payments, the housing decisions of a 
household can end up leading to payment commitments it cannot afford. In particular, there are 
three ways in which housing expenses can lead to bankruptcies:
(i) Very low income renters might make rental bids too close to their maximum payment limit, 
which can then become unaffordable under the slightest decrease in their income. This 
combines with the fact that, as a result of the parameter values estimated from data, the 
evolution of the income of very low income percentile households is characterized by more 
fluctuations than higher percentiles. Thus, these households can experience some decreases 
in their income even before retirement age.
(ii) BTL investors unable to rent their properties out might be unable to meet their interest-only 
mortgage payments.
(iii) BTL investors without savings large enough to repay the principal on their properties and 
unable to sell them before maturity will default on this final principal repayment.
44 Incomes can decrease in our model, but these decreases are mostly associated with retirement age, by which time 
all residential mortgages have been repaid.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

420 A. Carro et al.
Note that these types of bankruptcy happen in the absence of any explicitly modeled income 
shock and, in particular, the latter two are a result of the model’s market dynamics—respectively, 
of the rental and the sales market.
1.4 Bank interest rate spread
The interest rate paid by households on their mortgages is the sum of a fixed policy rate exoge-
nously set by the Central Bank and a variable interest rate spread set by the bank. This spread 
compensates the bank for factors such as credit risk, administrative expenses, and a profit margin, 
but these factors are not modeled explicitly.
We model interest rate spread movements as a linear function of movements of the amount of 
credit per household. That is, we compute the mortgage interest rate spread for the next month 
based on the spread for this month and the resulting increase or decrease in the demand for credit 
per household, which in this model is equivalent to supply, 
𝑖𝑡+1 = 𝑖𝑡 + 𝜑 (𝐶𝑡 − 𝐶𝑡−1)
𝑁 , (A.2)
where it is the interest rate spread at time t, Ct is the total credit supply (or demand) at time t, 
N is the number of households, and 𝜑 is a constant that we estimate from data as the average 
of the absolute value of month-to-month interest rate differences divided by the average of the 
absolute value of month-to-month amount of credit per household differences (see Appendix 2
Table A7 for estimation details). In this way, and bearing in mind that the policy rate is constant, 
increases (decreases) in the demand for credit will be counteracted with proportional increases 
(decreases) in interest rates, such that both the demand for credit and interest rates will tend to 
fluctuate around their initial values, which we set as estimated from data.
1.5 Market bid-up process
When a given house offered in any of the two housing markets—sales or rental—is matched with 
more than one bidder, the seller or property owner bids up the price k times by multiplying it 
k times by a bid-up factor larger than 1 and estimated from data (see Appendix 2 Table A8 for 
estimation details), 
𝑝new
𝑠 = 𝜒𝑘 𝑝𝑠, (A.3)
where 𝑝new
𝑠  is the updated offer price after the bid-up, ps is the old offer price, and 𝜒 is the bid-up 
factor. The idea behind bidding up the price k times is to make this k dependent on the number of 
bidders, such that properties with many bidders get to increase their price more than properties 
with just a few bidders. We model this dependency by assuming that the bids arrive at random 
days during the month and that a bid-up will take place whenever a new bid arrives within 3 days 
of the previous one. Thus, the bid-up process stops whenever a bid remains as the latest one for 
more than 3 days. Mathematically, this is equivalent to drawing, for each offer with multiple bids, 
a value of k from the geometric distribution 
𝑃 (𝑘) = (1 − 𝑃success)𝑘𝑃success , (A.4)
with 
𝑃success = (1 − 3
30 )
𝑏−1
, (A.5)
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 421
where b is the logarithm (base 10) of the number of bids received for this offer.45 Note that k has 
a certain probability of being k = 0, thus leading to no bid-up.
1.6 Market price information
Households make use of market price information when making their housing decisions. Two 
types of market information are available for the sales and rental markets, respectively: the HPI 
and rental price index (RPI) accounting for the behavior of the whole market, and the exponential 
moving average sale and rental price for each market quality segment. In order to build a market 
index for each market, we follow a mix adjustment methodology. In particular, for a given month, 
the market index is defined as the average price over all transactions completed during that month 
divided by the average reference price over the same set of transactions. The reference price of a 
house is the average price of houses of that quality as estimated from data, and can be thought 
of as a measure of that quality. The main reason for using exponential moving average sale and 
rental prices instead of simple averages is that, due to the scaling down of the population, the 
number of transactions in a given month may be quite small for some of the market quality 
segments.46
When trying to assess the mark-to-market value of a house, it is reasonable to think that house-
holds consider both the general market behavior, as captured by the market indices described 
above, and the behavior of the specific market quality segment under consideration, that is, the 
subset of houses of the same quality as the one being assessed. In order to capture this, we 
introduce the following modification of the exponential moving average sale and rental price, 
respectively, for each market quality segment used by households to make their decisions, 
𝑝′
𝑄 = 𝜌 𝑝𝑄 + (1 − 𝜌) 𝐼 𝑝ref
𝑄 , (A.6)
where pQ is the exponential moving average sale or rental price for houses of quality Q, I is the 
HPI or RPI for this month, 𝑝ref
𝑄  is the reference price of houses of quality Q, and 𝜌 is a parameter 
setting the relative weight given to the behavior of the market quality segment in particular as 
opposed to the general market behavior.
Appendix 2 Estimation and calibration of model parameters
The parameters of the model can be classified into three different categories depending on the 
type of estimation or calibration procedure used to set their value:
(i) Estimated parameters: Those parameters and distributions which can be directly estimated 
from available data sources. Most parameters in our model (56) belong to this category. 
We use data from 2011, where available, for reasons set out in Section 4. If data from 2011 
are not available, we choose the closest available year.
(ii) Postulated parameters with a sensitivity analysis: Those which cannot be directly estimated 
from readily available data sources but for which plausible values can be postulated. Fur-
thermore, their effects are contained to specific parts of the model, which makes them 
amenable to an independent sensitivity analysis, rather than a full calibration. This applies 
to six of the parameters in our model.
(iii) Calibrated parameters: Those which cannot be directly estimated from readily available 
data sources, whose effects are widespread across the model and for which it is unfeasible 
to postulate plausible values. This applies to five parameters in our model and, in particular, 
we use the method of simulated moments for their calibration.
45 The design of the market mechanism, which leads to all households able to afford a certain quality bidding for 
the cheapest house within that quality, frequently leads to rather large numbers of bids matched to the same offer. Thus, 
in order to get realistic numbers of bidders for a given property, we take the logarithm (base 10) of the number of 
matched bids for computing bid-ups.
46 Following one of the standards in the literature, we use a decay constant corresponding to assigning a cumulative 
weight of 1/4 to events older than a year and thus to a half-life of half a year.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

422 A. Carro et al.
In the following tables, we report the parameter values and how they are derived. For estimated 
parameters as described in point 1 above, we provide the underlying data sources. The list of 
data sources and their acronyms can be found in Table A1. Postulated parameters are labeled as 
“postulated.” Calibrated parameters are referred to as “calibrated,” and we provide more details 
on the calibration method in Appendix 2.2. A complete description of all parameters is available 
in the Online Appendix.
2.1 Parameters
Each of the following tables corresponds to the respective subsections of Section 3.
T able A1. List of data sources
 Acronym Acronym description
ARLA Association of Residential Letting Agents
ARLA Survey Members Survey of the Private Rented Sector (collected by ARLA, 2013)
BoE Bank of England
BoE-BTL Bank of England buy-to-let data (collected by BoE, 2018)
DCLG Department for Communities and Local Government
DEFRA Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
DWP Department for Work and Pensions
EHS English Housing Survey (collected by DCLG, 2013)
EPLS English Private Landlord Survey (collected by MHCLG, 2019)
FCA Financial Conduct Authority
HMRC HM Revenue and Customs
Land Registry HM Land Registry Price Paid Data
LCFS Living Costs and Food Survey (collected by DEFRA/ONS, 2020)
MHCLG Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government
MoneyFacts Mortgage Products Analysers (collected by MoneyFacts, 2011)
NMG BoE/NMG Household Survey (collected by BoE/NMG, 2018)
ONS Office for National Statistics
PSD FCA Mortgage Product Sales Data (collected by FCA, 2018)
WAS Wealth and Assets Survey (collected by ONS, 2022)
Zoopla WhenFresh/Zoopla Data (collected by WhenFresh, 2016)
T able A2. Initial model setup
Parameter Equation Value Source
Number of UK dwellings – 22, 626, 000 ONS
Number of households in the UK (A.2), 𝑁 = 26, 442, 100 ONS
T able A3. Income, nonhousing consumption and financial wealth
Parameter Equation Value Source
Age – Estimated distribution WAS
Gross monthly income – Estimated distribution WAS
Financial wealth (A.1) Estimated distribution WAS
Income tax – Rates by income bands HMRC
National insurance contributions – Rates by income bands HMRC
Minimum government income support – £445.80 DWP
Essential nonhousing consumption fraction – 0.66 LCFS
Maximum desired consumption fraction (A.1) 0.17 LCFS
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 423
T able A4. Housing decisions if in social housing
Parameter Equation Value Source
Desired purchase price
Scale (1) 𝛼 =42.9036 PSD, Land Registry
(continued)
T able A4. (Continued)
Parameter Equation Value Source
Exponent (1) 𝛽 =0.7892 PSD, Land Registry
Mean of normal noise (1) 𝜀𝜇 = −0.0177 PSD, Land Registry
Standard deviation of normal noise (1) 𝜀𝜎 = 0.4104 PSD, Land Registry
Distribution of house prices
Scale (A.6) 12.1186 Land Registry
Exponent (A.6) 0.6414 Land Registry
Distribution of rental prices
Scale (A.6) 6.2647 NMG
Exponent (A.6) 0.6353 NMG
Weight on market vs. segment house prices (A.6) 𝜌 =0.5 Calibrated
House price growth expectation
Multiplier factor (3) 𝛾 =0.44 NMG, Land Registry
Constant (3) 𝜁 = −0.007 NMG, Land Registry
Time period (years) 2 Postulated
Psychological cost of renting (4) 𝜆 =0.4 Calibrated
Sensitivity parameter (4) 𝜃 =0.001 Calibrated
Desired rental price
Scale (5) 𝜇 =17.2166 NMG
Exponent (5) 𝜈 =0.3464 NMG
Desired downpayment
FTBs, Scale – 10.35 PSD
FTBs, Shape – 0.898 PSD
HMs, Scale – 11.15 PSD
HMs, Shape – 0.958 PSD
T able A5. Housing decisions as an owner-occupier
Parameter Equation Value Source
Holding period of owner-occupied houses – 17 years EHS
Initial sale price markup, 𝜂 (6) Estimated distribution Zoopla
Sale price reduction
Monthly probability – 0.0703 Zoopla
Mean percentage reduction – 1.4531 Zoopla
Standard deviation of percentage reduction – 0.7070 Zoopla
2.2 Calibration: Method of simulated moments
After estimating from data as many parameters as possible, as well as manually calibrating those 
parameters for which a combination of an informed guess and a sensitivity analysis is sufficient, 
we need to calibrate the remaining five parameters. To do so, we use the method of simulated 
moments (Gilli and Winker, 2003; Franke, 2009; Franke and Westerhoff, 2012; Fabretti, 2013; 
Chen and Lux, 2018; Platt and Gebbie, 2018) to construct an objective function that measures 
the errors between a set of simulated moments and their corresponding data equivalents. Finally, 
by finding the minimum of this objective function over the hypercube of values explored for 
these parameters, we identify those values which minimize the distance between both sets of 
moments—simulated and estimated from data. Note that, in order to ensure being close enough 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

424 A. Carro et al.
T able A6. Housing decisions as a BTL investor
Parameter Equation Value Source
Probability to receive BTL flag
Raw probability – Estimated distance WAS
Probability adjustment – 1.76 Calibrated
BTL motivations
Rental-income-driven, probability – 0.4927 NMG
Rental-income-driven (RI), weight (7) and (10) 𝛿RI = 0.1 Postulated
Capital-gains-driven, probability – 0.1458 NMG
Capital-gains-driven (CG), weight (7) and (10) 𝛿CG = 0.9 Postulated
Mixed, probability – 0.3615 NMG
Mixed (M), weight (7) and (10) 𝛿M = 0.5 Postulated
Sensitivity of buy and sell decisions (8) and (11) 𝜉 =100 Calibrated
Downpayment fraction
Mean – 0.34 BoE-BTL
(continued)
T able A6. (Continued)
Parameter Equation Value Source
Standard deviation – 0.15 BoE-BTL
Initial rent price markup, 𝜂 (9) Estimated distance Zoopla, ONS
Rent price reduction
Monthly probability – 0.1057 Zoopla
Mean percentage reduction – 1.6559 Zoopla
Standard deviation of percentage reduction – 0.7855 Zoopla
Tenancy length
Minimum – 12 ARLA Survey
Maximum – 24 ARLA Survey
T able A7 . Bank and Central Bank parameters
Parameter Equation Value Source
Hard maximum LTV ratio
FTBs (12) ΓFTB = 0.9 MoneyFacts
HMs (12) ΓHM = 0.9 MoneyFacts
BTL investors (12) ΓBTL = 0.75 MoneyFacts
Hard maximum LTI ratio
FTBs (13) ΦFTB = 5.4 PSD
HMs (13) ΦHM = 5.6 PSD
Hard maximum DSTI ratio for home buyers (14) Ψ = 0.4 PSD
Hard minimum ICR for BTL investors (15) Ω = 1.25 BoE
Mortgage duration – 25 years PSD
Retirement age – 65 years Postulated
Elasticity of interest rate to credit (A.2) 𝜑 = 1.33𝑒−5 BoE, ONS
Bank initial interest rate (A.2) 3.5% BoE
Bank initial credit supply (A.2) £244.0 PSD, BoE-BTL
Exogenous policy rate – 0.5% BoE
T able A8. Housing market parameters
Parameter Equation Value Source
Bid-up parameter (A.3), 𝜒 =1.0746 Zoopla
Days under offer (A.5), 3 Postulated
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 425
T able A9. Moments and their target values
Moment Target value Simulation value
HPI mean 1.0 0.87
HPI standard deviation 0.3424 0.2076
HPI cycle period 201.0 186.63
RPI mean 1.0 0.98
Share of households owning 0.65 0.62
Share of households renting 0.17 0.21
Share of households BTL investing 0.0753 0.0792
Rental yield mean 5.10 4.13
Residential mortgages spread mean 2.9985 2.9935
to each of the moments selected, thus avoiding being too close in some and too far in others, we 
impose on each of them a bound of acceptability of ±25% of the target value.
The parameters calibrated with the method of simulated moments, as well as the specific values 
explored, are:
• Psychological cost of renting (see Equation [4]). Values explored: 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5.
• Sensitivity between rent or purchase (see Equation [4]). Values explored: 0.00001, 
0.00003162, 0.0001, 0.0003162, 0.001, 0.003162, 0.01, 0.03162, 0.1.
• BTL probability adjustment [see Appendix 1.2]. Values explored: 1.6, 1.62, 1.64, 1.66, 1.68, 
1.7, 1.72, 1.74, 1.76, 1.78, 1.8.
• Sensitivity for BTL buy and sell decisions (see Equations [8] and [11]). Values explored: 0.1, 
0.3162, 1, 3.162, 10, 31.62, 100, 316.2, 1000.
• Weight of market vs. segment house prices (see Equation [A.6]). Values explored: 0.1, 0.3, 
0.5, 0.7, 0.9.
This amounts to 26, 730 parameter combinations. We run 10 simulations per parameter com-
bination. Each simulation runs for 3500 time steps, out of which we will always discard the first 
500 time steps, except for both sale and rental transactions, for which we directly avoid recording 
the first 1000 time steps.
The moments used by the method, as well as the specific values targeted, are shown in Table A9. 
As explained above, we ignore parameter combinations for which any of the targeted moments, 
when averaged over the 10 available simulations, lies outside of the corresponding bound of 
acceptability (±25%). For each of the remaining parameter combinations, we compute the value 
of the criterion function, defined as a weighted sum of average squared percentage distances to 
the target moments (average refers to the 10 simulations available). In the absence of any clear 
and universally accepted rule to select these weights, we chose to give extra weight (>1) to the 
moments most relevant for the model output to match a realistic price behavior. For example, we 
give higher weight to moments related to sale prices as compared to those related to rental prices. 
Finally, we simply choose the parameter combination corresponding to the minimum value of the 
criterion function.
Appendix 3 Online Appendix
This Online Appendix accompanies the paper “Heterogeneous Effects and Spillovers of Macro-
prudential Policy in an Agent-Based Model of the UK Housing Market,” by Carro, Hin-
terschweiger, Uluc, and Farmer. It provides further detail on the estimation and calibration 
methodology of the parameters used in the model, as well as on the underlying data sources. 
The model code can be downloaded from https://github.com/INET-Complexity/housing-model.
Section 3.1 describes user set parameters. Section 3.2 provides information on the parameters 
that are estimated empirically. Section 3.3 describes the calibrated parameters which cannot be 
directly estimated from readily available data sources.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

426 A. Carro et al.
T able A10. User set parameters
Parameter Value
Seed for random number generation 1
Number of time steps 10,000
Number of simulations 1
Number of households 10,000
Time step to start recording transactions 2000
Rolling window for core indicator averages (in months) 6
Cumulative weight for events beyond 12 months 0.14
3.1 User set parameters
3.1.1 General model control
The parameters below (Table A10) are all to be set by the user for a general model control.
3.1.2 Central Bank
T able A11. Central Bank parameters
Parameter Value
Hard maximum LTV ratio
FTBs 0.9
HMs 0.9
BTL investors 0.75
Hard maximum LTI ratio
FTBs 5.4
HMs 5.6
Hard maximum DSTI ratio for home buyers 0.4
Hard minimum ICR for BTL investors 1.25
Mortgage duration 25 years
Retirement age 65 years
Exogenous policy rate 0.5%
These are all Central Bank control parameters determining the policies in place and thus used 
to run experiments. Their default values are estimated with data only if they are binding or 
influence the results in any way, which is the case only for the Central Bank base interest rate. 
The default value for this base rate is estimated as the actual BoE rate between 2009 and 2016. 
In particular, 0.5% was the base rate since March 5, 2009, when it was lowered from 1%, till 
August 4, 2016, when it was lowered to 0.25%. This parameter is kept at this default value for 
all simulations. The rest of the parameters, shown in Table A11, are identical to the ones that 
the bank sets in Table A7 in the main paper. They are, therefore, nonbinding in the benchmark 
version of the model and only bind when set to stricter values for the purpose of experiments, 
such as the ones undertaken in Section 5.
3.2 Estimated parameters
These are all parameters which can be directly estimated empirically from available data sources.
3.2.1 General parameters
• Number of households in the UK: Value 26, 442, 100. Used to compute the core indicators and 
the ratio of houses per household. Estimated with ONS 2011 Census data (Table H01UK) for 
the whole of the UK households with at least one usual resident.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 427
• Number of dwellings in the UK: Value 22, 626, 000. Used to compute the ratio of houses per 
household. Estimated with ONS Table 101 (discontinued) for 2011 for the stock of dwellings in 
the UK. We use the sum of the number of owner-occupied and privately rented dwellings. 
3.2.2 Household parameters
• Age distribution: Density of households in each of eight age bins between 15 and 95 years old. 
Estimated with WAS wave 3 household data.
• Joint distribution of age and gross income: HRP’s age bins and logarithmic income bins with 
their probabilities. Estimated with WAS wave 3 household data for total gross non-rent income 
(total gross income minus gross rent income).
• Joint distribution of net financial wealth and gross income: Logarithmic gross income bins 
and logarithmic net financial wealth bins with their probabilities. Estimated with WAS wave 3 
household data for total gross non-rent income (total gross income minus gross rent income) and 
net financial wealth. While WAS data include also liquid wealth and gross wealth, the definition 
of net wealth is the closest to what we call financial wealth in our model. Liquid wealth is too 
restrictive, not including a number of types of wealth which can be easily transformed into liquid 
wealth and later used for house purchases. Gross wealth, on the contrary, would count as usable 
for house downpayment categories of wealth which would not be readily available for it. 
3.2.3 Household behavior parameters
• Essential consumption fraction: Value 0.66. Fraction of Government income support (Job-
seeker’s allowance) necessarily spent a month as essential consumption. Estimated with LCFS 
data for 2011 (collected by ONS). In particular, data for households with monthly incomes 
between £ 400 and £ 480 are used.
• Maximum consumption fraction: Value 0.17. Maximum monthly desired consumption as a 
fraction of the household’s gross annual income. Estimated with LCFS data for 2011 (collected 
by ONS). In particular, we use the consumption fraction (monthly nonhousing consumption 
divided by gross annual income, for incomes above £ 5900 for consistency with our income bins) 
corresponding to the 99th percentile.
• Expectation formation: Slope (0.44) and intercept (−0.007) for the formation of expectations 
about the future behavior of prices based on their past behavior. Estimated with BoE’s NMG 
Survey and Land Registry data for 2014/2018. House price growth is calculated over 2 years 
i.e. growth between the most recent quarter and the quarter 2 years before. This is a postulated 
parameter. Both pre- and post-calibration analyses show that this parameter has a fairly clear 
and contained effect mostly restricted to the period of the cycles. This analysis shows that values 
of 1, 2, and 3 of this parameter can lead to price cycles coherent with OECD data for the UK. As 
a design decision, the parameter value was set to the intermediate value of 2.
• Desired purchase expenditure: Scale (42.9036); exponent (0.7892) to which the annual gross 
employment income of the household is raised when computing its budget for buying a house; 
and mean (−0.0177) and standard deviation (0.4104) of the normal noise used to create a log-
normal variate, which is then used as a multiplicative noise when computing the desired budget. 
Empirically estimated using PSD and Land Registry data for 2011. PSD data were trimmed.
• Desired downpayment: Scale (10.35) and shape (0.898) parameters for the log-normal distri-
bution of desired downpayments by FTBs. Empirically estimated with PSD data for 2011. Scale 
(11.15) and shape (0.958) parameters for the log-normal distribution of desired downpayments 
by HMs. Empirically estimated with PSD data for 2011. Average downpayment (0.34), as a 
percentage of house price for BTL investors and standard deviation (0.15) of the noise for down-
payments by BTL investors. Empirically estimated with BoE-BTL data for 2014 (earliest available 
data point).
• Holding period of owner-occupied houses: Value 17. Average period, in years, for which 
owner-occupiers hold their houses. 1/(12 ⋅Hold Period) is the monthly probability that an 
owner-occupier household would sell its house. Empirically estimated from EHS data for 2011.
• Distribution of sale price markup: Initial sale price markup over average price of same qual-
ity houses, bins with their probabilities. Empirically estimated with Zoopla data (raw collated 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

428 A. Carro et al.
listings). In particular, final sale price, final sale date, and initial posting date are used, combined 
with HPI evolution, to back-project an initial “real value” price for each property, which is then 
compared with the actual initial listing price to find an initial markup for each property.
• Sale price reduction: Monthly probability of reducing the price of a house on the market is 
0.0703. Empirical estimation with Zoopla data (raw collated listings) from 2003 to 2015. Mean 
(1.4532) and standard deviation (0.7070) of percentage reduction for prices of houses on the 
market. Empirical estimation with Zoopla data (raw daily listings) from 2003 to 2015. 
3.2.4 Household behavior: BTL
• Probability of receiving a BTL investor flag per income percentile bin: Income percentiles are 
found for each household in the dataset using gross non-rental income, that is, gross total income 
minus gross rental income. Then, for each 1% bin, the fraction of BTL investors is found, using 
a nonzero gross rental income as flagging a BTL investor. Empirically estimated with WAS wave 
3 household data for total gross non-rent income (total gross income minus gross rent income) 
and gross rental income.
• Probability of BTL investor being driven by income, capital gains, or mixed motives: The prob-
ability for rental-income-driven is 0.4927, for capital-gains-driven is 0.1458, and thus for mixed 
motives it is 0.3615. Probability of a BTL household having a rental-income-driven, capital-gains-
driven, or mixed strategy. For each household who receives the BTL flag, this probability decides 
the weights the household will assign to rental yield as opposed to capital gains. Empirically 
estimated with NMG survey data for 2014.47
• Weight on capital gains for BTL income-driven, capital-gains-driven, and mixed strategies:
Value 0.1 for rental-income-driven households, 0.9 for capital-gains-driven households, and 0.5 
for households with a mixed strategy. Sets the weight given to capital gains as opposed to the 
rental yield by three different types of BTL households. Design decision with robustness analysis 
both before and after the full model calibration. These values are chosen as a representation 
of households highly driven by rental income, highly driven by capital gains, or driven by an 
equal combination of both factors. Note that, in the case of households highly driven by capital 
gains or by rental income, they still take the alternative strategy into account. This avoids highly 
unreasonable behaviors, such as households sticking to their rental properties even if they believe 
prices would be completely tanking or households selling their rental properties if prices slightly 
fall even if rental income would be extremely high. 
3.2.5 Household behavior: Rent
Desired rental expenditure:
• Scale parameter of rental bid fraction: Value 17.2166. The number of annual salaries (raised 
to the exponent of rental bid fraction) that the renter is willing to spend for renting a house. 
Empirically estimated using BoE’s NMG Survey data for 2016.
• Exponent of rental bid fraction: Value 0.3464. The exponent to which the annual gross 
employment income of the household is raised when computing its desired budget for renting 
a house. Empirically estimated using BoE’s NMG Survey data for 2016.
Rental length: Value 12 (minimum) and 24 (maximum). The minimum/maximum number of 
months of a rental contract. Rental contract lengths are drawn from a uniform discrete distribu-
tion between the minimum and maximum values for the tenancy length. Empirically estimated 
from literature using ARLA annual report (ARLA Members Survey of the Private Rented Sector) 
for 2013 Q4. 
47 Similar data are available from DCLG for 2010. However, these data refer to the fraction of houses and not 
the fraction of landlords. Finally, ARLA data are also available, but they include other categories, such as saving for 
retirement, whose motivation is absent from our model.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 429
3.2.6 Household behavior: Rent-out
• Initial rental markup distribution: Logarithmic initial sale price markup over average price of 
same-quality houses, bins with their probabilities. Empirically estimated with Zoopla data (raw 
collated listings) and ONS’s RPI data (only for England, as full UK data are only available from 
2015). In particular, the final sale price, final sale date, and initial posting date are used, combined 
with RPI evolution, to back-project an initial “real value” price for each property, which is then 
compared with the actual initial listing price to find an initial markup for each property.
Rent-out price reduction:
• Probability of rental price reduction: Value 0.1057. The monthly probability of reducing the 
rent price of an unrented house on the market. The empirical estimation with Zoopla data 
(raw collated listings) from 2003 to 2015.
• Percentage reduction of rental price: Value 1.6559 (mean) and 0.7855 (standard deviation). 
The mean/standard deviation of percentage reduction for rent prices of unrented houses on 
the market. Empirical estimation with Zoopla data (raw collated listings) from 2003 to 2015.
3.2.7 Housing market
• Days under offer: Value 3. Time, in days, that a house remains under offer and thus the seller 
would consider bids for a possible bid-up. When an offer receives multiple bids in a single time 
step (a month), these bids are assumed to arrive randomly during the month. Due to the design 
of the market mechanism, which leads to a large numbers of bids per offer, the log10 of the 
number of bids received is used here, to approximate a realistic number of bids. When a bid 
is followed by another bid within a time window of the “days under offer,” then the price is 
increased by multiplying it by the “bid-up multiple” (see below). As soon as a bid is followed by 
a time window of “days under offer” without another bid, the bid-up process is stopped. This 
parameter is considered a design decision, i.e. postulated. In any case, we have checked that the 
resulting distribution of the number of bid-ups is coherent with the one observed in Zoopla data. 
Furthermore, a robustness analysis done for a fixed set of parameters and trying different values 
for this specific parameter in the same order of magnitude shows only a small variation in terms 
of the distribution of the number of bid-ups.
• Bid-up multiple: Value 1.0746. The size of a gazump or increase in price due to multiple bidders. 
Empirically estimated from Zoopla data (raw collated listings). The average price increase per 
price update is computed as (Price/Initial price)(1/price updates) for all houses with a positive price 
change.
• Parameters for house price distribution: Values 12.1186 (scale) and 0.6414 (shape). The 
scale/shape parameter for the log-normal distribution of house prices. This estimated distribution 
of house prices is used to determine the initial price of each market quality segment. These initial 
sale prices are then used whenever households need to consider the sale price evolution of the 
different market quality segments, such as for computing the HPI, which takes into account the 
market composition at each time step. Empirically estimated with Land Registry Price Paid Data 
for 2011.
• Parameters for rental price distribution: Values 6.2647 (scale) and 0.6353 (shape). The 
scale/shape parameter for the log-normal distribution of house rental prices. This estimated dis-
tribution is used to find the initial rental price of each market quality segment. These initial rental 
prices are then used whenever households need to consider the rental price evolution of the differ-
ent market quality segments, such as for computing the RPI, which takes into account the market 
composition at each time step. Empirically estimated with BoE’s NMG Survey data for 2016.
• Initial rental gross yield: Value 0.05. The initial profit margin for BTL investors at the beginning 
of the simulation. The effect of this value disappears soon after the model starts running and 
determining rental yields endogenously. Empirically estimated in the literature. In particular, we 
note two separate sources pointing at a 5% value. First, an analysis matching data from Zoopla 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

430 A. Carro et al.
and Land Registry shows yields in the area of 5%–6.6%, depending on the type of property. 48 
Second, ARLA’s annual report for 2013 points at an average value of 5% for rental yields. 
3.2.8 Bank
• Mortgage duration: Value 25. Mortgage duration in years. Empirically estimated with PSD data 
for 2011 as the median mortgage duration in this dataset.
• Retirement age: Value 65. Maximum age for a household to get a mortgage and maximum 
age for a non-BTL household to finish repaying its mortgages, i.e. akin to their retirement age. 
BTL mortgages have always full maturity, but they can only be approved before the household 
reaches this age limit. Non-BTL mortgages, on the contrary, will have their maturities reduced 
before this age limit in such a way that they are fully repaid by the time the household reaches 
this age limit.
• Bank initial interest rate: Value 0.035. The private bank initial interest rate for mortgages. Note 
that this is the total rate, not the private bank spread. The effect of this value disappears soon 
after the model starts running and setting interest rates endogenously. The empirical estimation 
with BoE Housing Core Indicators, the overall spread on new mortgages, plus the central bank 
rate, averaged for all months in 2011.
• Bank initial credit supply: Value 244.0. The bank’s initial supply of credit per household per 
month. It is used as the initial value of the previous supply of credit per household per month, 
which is then compared with the actual supply of credit per household per month in order to 
determine the interest rate movement for the next month. Empirically estimated with PSD data 
for 2011 and BoE-BTL data for 2018. In particular, principals advanced to FTBs and HMs are 
assessed from PSD data for 2011 while principals advanced for BTL investment are assessed from 
BoE-BTL data for 2018.
• Elasticity of interest rate to credit: Value 1.33𝑒−5. The rate of change of the interest rate in 
response to a change in the demand/supply for credit per household per month (in points per 
pound per household per month). Empirically estimated with a combination of data sources. 
Since we are only interested in setting the order of magnitude of rate movements as a response 
to credit demand changes, we perform here a very rough estimate. In particular, the value of 
this parameter is the average of the absolute value of month-to-month interest rate differences 
(from BoE core indicators) divided by the average of the absolute value of month-to-month 
amount of credit per household differences (from BoE stats table A5.3 VTUZ and ONS number 
of households). All data sources are trimmed to the common period, 1996–2017.
• Hard maximum LTV ratio: Value 0.9 (both for FTBs and HMs). The internal bank policy and 
hard maximum LTV ratio for FTBs and HMs. Empirically estimated with MoneyFacts data for 
2011 (which contain information on the products offered). In particular, we use the mode of the 
10 largest UK mortgage lenders which report MoneyFacts data.
• Hard maximum LTV ratio for BTL investors: Value 0.75. The internal bank policy and hard 
maximum LTV ratio for BTL investors. Empirically estimated with MoneyFacts data for 2011 
(which contains information on the products offered). In particular, we use the mode of the 10 
largest UK mortgage lenders which report MoneyFacts data.
• Hard maximum LTI ratio: Values 5.4 (FTBs) and 5.6 (HMs). The internal bank policy and hard 
maximum LTI for FTBs/HMs. Empirically estimated with PSD data for 2011. In particular, we 
use the 99th percentile.
• Hard maximum DSTI ratio for home buyers: Value 0.4. The internal bank policy (debt-service-
to-income or debt-service ratio) and hard maximum fraction of household’s income to be spent 
on mortgage repayments (for both FTBs and HMs). Empirically estimated with PSD data for 
2011. In particular, we use the 99th percentile.
• Hard minimum ICR for BTL investors: Value 1.25. The internal bank policy (interest coverage 
ratio) and hard minimum ratio between (expected) annual rental income and annual inter-
est payments. Industry standard described as 125% in Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) 
Supervisory Statement SS13/16 (paragraph 2.7).
48 Bracke, P. (2015). ‘How much do investors pay for houses?,’ Staff Working Paper 549, Bank of England.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

Heterogeneous effects and spillovers of macroprudential policy 431
3.2.9 Government parameters
• Income tax personal allowance: Tax-free personal allowance for income tax if income does not 
go above the personal allowance income limit (see the next parameter). Estimated with HMRC 
data on income tax personal allowances and reliefs for the tax year 2011–2012. In particular, 
we use the personal allowance for a single person, £ 7475. We have, however, checked the WAS 
data for 2011 in order to confirm that a single allowance does lead to net income results closer 
to data, as opposed to using a double allowance which would rather correspond to a household 
with two tax payers.
• Income limit for income tax personal allowance: Income limit above which the untaxed personal 
allowance (see the previous parameter) starts to decrease at a rate of £ 1 for every £ 2 the gross 
income goes above this limit. Estimated with HMRC data on income tax personal allowances 
and reliefs for the tax year 2011–2012. Its value is £ 100,000.
• Minimum government income support: Income support (Jobseeker’s Allowance) for a couple, 
both over 18 years old, in 2011, which amounts to £ 445.80 a month. Estimated with DWP data 
on government support and allowances for the year 2012.
• Income tax: Bands of income (lower thresholds after personal allowance) and their correspond-
ing tax rates. Estimated with HMRC data on income tax for the tax year 2011–2012. These tax 
rates are applied to all incomes in the model, thus including also the rental income. Finally, we 
have also implemented finance cost reliefs for BTL investors, exempting them from paying tax on 
their interest costs. Note that, while this finance cost relief was progressively removed between 
2017 and 2020, it was available during our target year for estimation, 2011.
• National insurance contributions: Bands of income and their corresponding tax/contribution 
rates. Estimated with HMRC data on national insurance contributions for a class 1 employee for 
the tax year 2011–2012. Note that the bands used already include any untaxed allowance. 
3.3 Calibrated parameters
These are parameters which cannot be directly estimated from readily available data sources, 
whose effects are widespread across the model and for which it is unfeasible to postulate plausible 
values.
3.3.1 Household behavior: Rent vs. purchase decision
Psychological cost of renting: The annual psychological cost of renting, as a percentage increase 
over the actual cost of renting. The values tested in the calibration process went from 0.0, so as 
to not impose the mechanism, up to 0.5 in steps of 0.1. The pre-calibration analysis pointed at 
values above 0.5 as leading to too low rental prices, since only households unable to buy would 
decide to bid in the rental market. The value selected by the calibration process was 0.4.
Sensitivity between rent and purchase: Sensitivity parameter for the decision between buying 
and renting. We have tested nine logarithmically arranged values between 0.00001 and 0.1, thus 
exploring five orders of magnitude, two below order O(0) and two above it, plus intermediate 
points. In this case, since the variable multiplied by the sensitivity parameter in the exponential 
has the order of magnitude O(3), then the central order of magnitude for this sensitivity parameter 
will be 𝑂(−3), that is, 0.001. The value selected by the calibration process was 0.001. 
3.3.2 Household behavior: BTL
BTL probability adjustment: Adjustment or multiplier factor for the probability of any household 
receiving the BTL flag, thus allowing it to invest in BTL properties. This, thus, modifies the 
probability of receiving this flag for all income percentile bins, as estimated from the WAS. The 
purpose of this parameter is to increase these probabilities, such that the actual number of BTL 
investors matches the real one, also estimated from the WAS to be 0.075262. In this way, this 
takes into account the fact that what we are setting is the (unobservable) tendency to become 
a BTL investor, but the data contain the actual number of investors. For different reasons, such 
as having insufficient financial wealth or a lower income, a number of households in the model 
with the BTL flag will be unable to buy investment properties. Thus, we need a larger fraction 
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026

432 A. Carro et al.
of households with the flag so as to match the actual fraction of investors. Since pre-calibration 
analysis pointed at values below 1.6 as leading to too few actual investors and values above 1.8 as 
leading to too many of them, we have tested 11 values between and including these two extremes 
during the calibration process. Finally, the value selected was 1.76.
Sensitivity for BTL buy and sell decisions: The sensitivity parameter for the decisions to buy 
and sell BTL investment properties, as a function of their expected yield. As with the previous 
sensitivity parameter, we have tested nine logarithmically arranged values, this time between 0.1 
and 1000, thus exploring five orders of magnitude, two below order O(0) and two above it, plus 
intermediate points. In this case, since the variable multiplied by the sensitivity parameter in the 
exponential has the order of magnitude 𝑂(−1), the central order of magnitude for this sensitivity 
parameter will be O(1), that is, 10. The value selected by the calibration process was 100. 
3.3.3 Housing market
Weight on market vs. segment house prices: This is the weight given by households to the gen-
eral market behavior of prices, as measured by the HPI, as opposed to the price behavior of the 
specific market quality segment under consideration. Thus, it is used to compute the exponential 
moving average transaction price for the different quality segments. A value of 0.0 would mean 
households focusing only on the price evolution of the whole market, completely disregarding 
the price evolution of the specific quality segment of interest, while a value of 1.0 would mean 
households focusing only on the quality-segment-specific price evolution, disregarding the behav-
ior of the market as a whole. In addition to these two extreme cases, we have explored the whole 
range of this parameter in steps of 0.1. The value selected by the calibration process was 0.5.
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/icc/article/32/2/386/6643252 by Dalhousie University user on 26 August 2026
