Applied Soft Computing Journal 152 (2024) 111235
Available online 4 January 2024
1568-4946/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Intelligent strategic bidding in competitive electricity markets using 
multi-agent simulation and deep reinforcement learning 
Jiahui Wu , Jidong Wang , Xiangyu Kong * 
Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education on Smart Power Grids, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China   
HIGHLIGHTS 
• A theoretical framework of intelligent electricity market bidding using MAS and DRL. 
• Three MAS models of intelligent bidding are established based on three DRL Algorithms. 
• Convergence speed and response sensitivity using three DRL algorithms are compared. 
• An improved DRL algorithm is proposed and a MAS model is established based on it.  
ARTICLE INFO  
key words: 
Intelligent bidding strategy 
Competitive electricity markets 
Multi-agent simulation(MAS) 
Deep reinforcement learning(DRL) 
Async n-step QL 
Improved Async n-step QL 
ABSTRACT  
Aiming at the lack of comprehension of agents in Multi-Agent Simulation (MAS) based on classic Reinforcement 
Learning algorithms of competitive electricity markets, an intelligent strategic bidding method using Deep 
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) and MAS is proposed in this paper, which not only can provide more intelligent 
strategies for market participants to maximize their profits, but can enhance the performance of simulation 
models dealing with high-dimensional continuous data in electricity markets. Firstly, a theoretical framework of 
intelligent strategic bidding in competitive electricity markets based on MAS and DRL is proposed, and the 
process of intelligent bidding in electricity markets based on MAS and DRL is described. Then, three MAS models 
of intelligent strategic bidding are built based on three classic DRL algorithms, including Deep Q-Network (DQN), 
Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN), and Asynchronous n-step Q-learning (Async n-step QL), and three algorithms’ 
convergence speed, computational efficiency, and response sensitivity are compared and analyzed. Finally, a 
novel Improved Async n-step QL (IAsync n-step QL) algorithm is proposed, the MAS model based on the IAsync 
n-step QL algorithm for intelligent strategic bidding is established. Simulation results show that the model using 
the novel DRL algorithm is more profitable and responsive than the classic DRL algorithms.   
1. Introduction 
With the entry of electricity sales companies established by social 
capital into the electricity market [1], the electricity spot market places 
higher and more specialized requirements on the access rules of elec-
tricity sales companies in terms of bidding decisions and deviation 
control [2]. As an increasingly complex and dynamic environment, in-
dividuals in the electricity market take actions to maximize their in-
terests, reflecting their adaptability and learning ability. Agents in 
Multi-agent Simulations (MAS) can make autonomous decisions and 
interact with other agents, which resemble various social behaviors such 
as collaboration, competition, etc., rather than just the data exchange 
between them. Therefore, MAS methods are often used to study the 
bidding behavior in electricity markets [3]. Also, with artificial intelli-
gence techniques, market participants can be empowered to learn 
adaptively to achieve optimal profitability [4]. Therefore, using MAS 
combined with machine learning algorithms can develop optimal stra-
tegies for market participants, thus simulating the bidding behavior of 
the electricity selling side in real electricity markets. 
Many scholars around the world have studied bidding strategies on 
the electricity selling side in the electricity market [5,6]. Among them, 
the Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm [7,8], as a popular method 
to help power plant agents optimize their own bidding behavior and 
make decisions, can be combined with Multi-agent Simulation methods 
to maximize profits, has been widely used in different aspects of the 
electricity market [9,10], and has become a new solution for the 
* Correspondence to: Key Laboratory of Smart Grid of Ministry of Education, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Applied Soft Computing 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/asoc 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2024.111235 
Received 1 March 2023; Received in revised form 8 September 2023; Accepted 31 December 2023

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
2
management and supervision of the electricity market.However, RL al-
gorithms suffer from dimensional catastrophes [11–13] in practical 
applications and have many limitations. Using deep neural networks 
instead of discrete tables to approximate the value functions and 
training can solve the dimensionality catastrophe in the state space and 
action space, which usually lead to better results [14]. Therefore, 
combined with the advantages of RL in training samples, interaction 
methods and decision-making, based on Deep Learning (DL) algorithms, 
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is proposed as a new machine 
learning algorithm. It combines the perception ability of DL and the 
decision-making ability of RL, which is an artificial intelligence method 
closer to the way of human thinking. 
Since Mnih et al. proposed Deep Q-Network (DQN) [15], research in 
the field of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has developed rapidly. 
Based on the classic DQN method, researchers proposed the Double DQN 
(DDQN) algorithm, which eliminated the problem of overestimation and 
validated the better performance of the DDQN method in some Atari 
games [16]. Then referring to the human learning process that priori-
tizes past successful experiences. Ref. [17] applied the Power-weighted 
Experience Replay (PER) to DQN and DDQN using time-difference error 
to improve the model’s performance. In addition, Wang et al. proposed a 
Dueling DQN structure, which splits the last fully-connected layer in the 
classic DQN network into two independent fully-connected layers for 
estimating the state value function and the dominance function, 
respectively, to speed up the convergence of training [18]. In addition to 
value-based methods, researchers have made some progress in intro-
ducing deep learning to policy gradient methods in reinforcement 
learning. Actor-critic methods [19] are one of the common frameworks, 
but often suffer from the difficulty of simultaneous converging of Actor 
and Critic networks. Casas has made some progress using an actor-critic 
method based on the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) 
method [20] to solve this problem. In addition, the asynchronous 
learning method exploits the natural irrelevance between different 
processes to sample multiple learning processes. Therefore, the corre-
lation problem of the observed sequences in a single training process can 
be solved without using experience replay. Ref. [21] proposed a general 
asynchronous reinforcement learning framework while replacing 
single-step rewards with multistep rewards and proposed an Asyn-
chronous n-step Q-Learning method (Async n-step QL). 
In recent years, more and more scholars try to use DRL algorithms to 
study electricity markets, focusing on improving the accuracy of elec-
tricity load forecasting [22] and electricity price forecasting [23], as 
well as studying the bidding strategies of market participants [24,25]. In 
the study of the bidding strategies on electricity selling side, in [26], 
power companies use Deep Q-Networks (DQN) to learn the optimal 
bidding strategy from the raw data of complex games to reduce the 
market-clearing price. In view of the large-scale participation of 
renewable energy in electricity market bidding, Ref. [27] uses the deep 
deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm to describe the game 
behavior between renewable energy generators and traditional gener-
ators. Ref. [28] uses the maximum entropy based Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) 
algorithm to improve the efficiency of wind power plants in the 
real-time market while maintaining its robustness. Ref. [29] uses the 
SAC algorithm to simulate the behavior of the Virtual Power Plant 
(VPP), and uses the DDPG algorithm to simulate the behavior of the 
electric vehicle charging station to achieve the game balance between 
the power generation side and the power consumption side. By 
improving the DDPG algorithm, the Markov decision process describing 
the pricing can be solved to obtain the optimal bidding and pricing 
strategy [30], thereby enhancing the bidding ability of Gas-Fired Units 
(GFU) in integrated electricity and natural gas markets [31], and in-
crease the market-clearing price in the bidding process of the electricity 
market [32]. 
Recently, some scholars have gradually tried to apply the Deep 
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithm and the Multi-Agent Simula-
tion (MAS) to the research on the electricity market, among which the 
Multi-agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MADRL) algorithm is the 
most commonly used. Ref. [33] studied electricity market bidding with 
multiple strategic generation company bidders using the MADRL in 
order to obtain an optimal strategy. Ref. [34] used MADRL to bid for 
power plants in the day-ahead market and the real-time market. 
Ref. [35] first applied the MADRL in the design of a Local Electricity 
Market (LEM) to optimize its market function. In the related research of 
Virtual Power Plants (VPPs), [36] used MADRL to regulate VPPs in 
distribution network to realize real-time energy sharing and manage-
ment in community power market. Ref. [37] used MADRL to regulate 
VPPs in the microgrid, so that the VPP with market power can become 
the price maker. The MADRL algorithm was also applied to study load 
frequency control of the multi-area power system [38]. Ref. [12] used 
MADRL to simulate the price game among charging stations and to 
obtain the optimal charging price for a single electric vehicle. 
In the above existing research based on MADRL, however, for a 
single agent in its multi-agent simulation system, the behavior of other 
agents is predetermined or considered as part of the environment which 
is fixed for a certain period of time, which leads to the fact that the 
dynamic interactive bidding behaviors between the agents on the elec-
tricity selling side in the electricity market cannot be fully simulated. 
Therefore, there still needs to be a research gap in combining MAS and 
DRL to study intelligent strategic bidding in competitive electricity 
markets. Therefore, this paper combines MAS and DRL algorithms to 
study the dynamic bidding strategic behaviors of competitive electricity 
markets. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: 
1) The bidding process of each participant in competitive electricity 
markets under the Energy Internet is essentially an intelligent decision- 
making process, which requires the support of Artificial Intelligence 
technology; and the bidding process is a complex dynamic process that is 
difficult to establish an accurate mathematical model, which require the 
support of computer simulation technology. Therefore, in order to solve 
the problem of insufficient intelligent decision-making ability and 
simulation computing ability in competitive electricity market bidding, 
a simulation method of intelligent strategic bidding in competitive 
electricity markets based on Multi-agent Simulation (MAS) and Deep 
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is proposed. MAS method solves the 
problem that single agent can only be confined to a simple market 
environment with complete information and cannot intuitively reflect 
the dynamic interactive bidding behaviors among multiple participants; 
And the employment of DRL algorithms avoids the unstable conver-
gence caused by the traditional RL algorithm limited to low-dimensional 
discrete state and action space, and enhances the performance of the 
model on processing high-dimensional continuous data. 
2) A theoretical framework of intelligent strategic bidding using 
Multi-agent Simulation (MAS) and Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) 
in competitive electricity markets is proposed. The framework consists 
of two parts: one part is MAS that simulates the data exchange behaviors 
and relations between entities during the bidding process based on 
bidding strategies in electricity markets; the other part is bidding stra-
tegies learning which provides more intelligent strategies for market 
participants to maximize their profits. Then, the modeling process and 
simulation process based on Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) and 
Multi-Agent Simulation (MAS) are designed. Three MAS models of 
intelligent strategic bidding based on three classic DRL algorithms are 
established in the electricity market, including Deep Q-Network (DQN), 
Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN), and Asynchronous n-step Q-Learning 
(Async n-step QL). 
3) An improved Async n-step QL (IAsync n-step QL) algorithm is 
proposed to establish a MAS model of intelligent strategic bidding in 
competitive electricity markets based on it. And by running the model, 
the effectiveness of the IAsync n-step QL algorithm is verified. The 
simulation results show that the application of the novel Async n-step QL 
algorithm improves the profitability of power plant agents when the 
market demand is low, and promotes market competition by encour-
aging active bidding behavior, which is superior to the simulation 
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
3
models based on the other three classic DRL algorithms. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a 
theoretical framework for intelligent strategic bidding based on MAS 
and DRL algorithms in competitive electricity markets. Section 3 applies 
three DRL algorithms to the Multi-agent simulation model of strategic 
bidding in the competitive electricity markets. Section 4 analyzes each 
algorithm in terms of computational efficiency, convergence speed, and 
responsiveness to supply and demand changes under different demand- 
to-supply ratios. Section 5 proposes a novel Improved Async n-step QL 
(IAsync n-step QL) algorithm, establishes a MAS model based on IAsync 
n-step QL and proves the advantages of the improved Async n-step QL 
algorithm. The conclusions are presented in Section 6. 
2. Theoretical framework of intelligent strategic bidding in 
competitive electricity markets 
This paper proposes a novel theoretical framework for intelligent 
strategic bidding in diverse competitive electricity markets based on 
MAS and DRL algorithms, as Fig. 1. Fig. 1 contains two parts, one is 
multi-agent simulation including entities in competitive electricity 
markets, which is used to describe the relationships and data exchange 
behaviors between entities in real competitive electricity markets. The 
other part is the bidding strategic learning using a specific DRL algo-
rithm to provide more intelligent learning strategies for electricity 
buyers and sellers to maximize the profits of each entity. The partici-
pants in the electricity market trading process can be classified into 
three types: Generator agents (Gn), the Independent System Operator 
(ISO) agent, and buyer agents (Bm). Seller agents are different types of 
power plants, whereas buyer agents include various small and medium- 
sized factories, commercial companies, and community residents. The 
decision-making behavior of individual agent and the interaction be-
tween agents maintain the proper functioning of the competitive elec-
tricity market. 
The bidding strategic learning in Fig. 1 is contained within the seller 
and the buyer agents, and DRL algorithms can be used to generate 
strategy networks for market analysis and decision making. First, the 
power plants need to obtain key information about the electricity mar-
kets, such as market clearing price, bidding information of other agents 
and calculate their profit. The above observations and environment 
analysis can be used as state inputs to the DRL algorithm. After inputting 
observations of the electricity market environment, corresponding 
quotation actions can be generated to maximize profits in the next 
bidding round. Therefore, the bidding strategic learning is a decision- 
making unit for power plants and reflects the agent’s ability to adapt 
and learn. Similarly, bidding strategic learning also applies to the 
decision-making unit of buyer agents in the electricity market. 
We adopt the current mainstream centralized trading model: elec-
tricity sellers and buyers trade through an Independent System Operator 
(ISO). ISO calculates the final uniform clearing price from the bidding 
prices submitted by the electricity sellers and buyers according to 
market clearing rules, and completes the transaction at the clearing 
price. To simplify the model, the centralized trading mode is generally 
reduced to a unilateral form, i.e., the electricity demand remains un-
changed. In the market, only the electricity selling entities sell electricity 
for profits using intelligent strategic bidding. 
There are two main settlement methods in the centralized trading 
electricity market currently: MCP (Market Clearing Price) and PAB (Pay 
as Bid) [39]. In each round of bidding, ISO ranks the bidding prices from 
lowest to highest and accumulates the corresponding volumes until the 
accumulated volumes are no less than the total market demand. Under 
PAB rules, all winning power plants trade at their respective bid prices. 
And the market settlement price under the MCP is the bid price of the 
last power plant to be accumulated. In this paper, we adopt MCP as the 
bidding rules when the market is cleared. 
3. Intelligent strategic simulation model in competitive 
electricity markets using DRL and MAS 
In this section, based on the theoretical framework of intelligent 
strategic bidding in electricity markets, the simulation method of 
intelligent strategic bidding in electricity markets based on DRL algo-
rithms is studied and the MAS models of intelligent strategic bidding 
based on DRL algorithms are established. The modeling process is 
divided into the generation of intelligent strategic bidding based on DRL 
algorithms and the MAS modeling of the behavior between entities 
during the bidding process. 
Three classic value-based DRL algorithms, including Deep Q 
Network (DQN) algorithm, Double Deep Q Network (DDQN) algorithm, 
and Asynchronous n-step Q-learning (Async n-step QL) algorithm, are 
applied to the multi-agent simulation model of electricity market bid-
ding, and the changes of variables are analyzed qualitatively and 
quantitatively. It is worth noting that we select the Async n-step QL 
algorithm, which is more advantageous in the context of the applica-
tions in the model of this paper, as an example to introduce the DRL- 
based electricity market multi-agent simulation model for intelligent 
bidding. 
Fig. 1. The theoretical framework of intelligent strategic bidding in competitive electricity markets using multi-agent simulation and deep reinforcement learning.  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
4
3.1. Intelligent strategic bidding using DRL algorithms 
In traditional deep reinforcement learning methods that utilize the 
experience replay mechanisms, it is necessary to sample from a large 
historical dataset to destroy correlations in the time series. Furthermore, 
data generated by previous strategies may prevent the optimization of 
new strategies, which leads to a slower convergence of the learning 
process. An asynchronous concurrent architecture can solve these 
problems by exploiting the natural irrelevance between learning 
threads. 
In an asynchronous learning algorithm, an agent can parallelize 
several learning threads, starting from different states and exploring 
different actions to obtain different observation sequences. Moreover, 
the shared network parameters can be updated alternately between 
different threads, making the parameters becomes higher more 
frequently updated and the prediction of the output results more accu-
rate. In addition, the n-step asynchronous framework differs from the 
single-step framework in that each thread computes the parameter up-
dates by performing multiple actions at a time instead of one action, and 
accumulates the updates of each action and updates them to the original 
network parameters together after reaching a certain number of steps. 
Algorithms of Async n-step QL is shown in Fig. 2. [21]. 
3.1.1. Training steps of DRL algorithms in multi-agent simulation 
Step 1: Determine the neural network structure corresponding to 
each agent, such as the network depth, the number of hidden layer 
nodes, whether to use convolutional layers, etc., and initialize the 
network parameters randomly. 
Step 2: Determine the hyperparameters in the training process, such 
as learning rate, discount factor, ϵ annealing rate, number of training 
steps, optimizer, etc. 
Step 3: In each training segment, the agent and the state of the 
environment are initialized, and then several training steps are 
performed. 
Step 4: In each training step, each agent i observes the environment 
and selects actions to execute according to the ϵ  greedy strategy, and 
records the next state and their respective single-step rewards, and up-
dates the optimization network by optimizing the error between the 
current value and the target value Parameter θi. 
Step 5: When the number of training rounds reaches the set upper 
limit or a certain training index reaches the expected value, the training 
is stopped, and each agent obtains a parameterized neural network from 
state mapping to action—the well trained strategy, which can be called 
by multi-agent simulation. 
3.1.2. Settings of training parameters 
A fully connected structure is used to set up the network structure. 
The number of nodes in the input and output layers of the network is 20, 
which is equal to the dimensions of the state space and action space 
above. And three hidden layers are set, with 100 hidden nodes in each 
layer. 
In training hyperparameter settings, the maximum iterations per 
training round are set to 50 steps, and the cumulative maximum number 
of steps is 4800. The size of the mini-batch for each sampling is32, and 
the reinforcement learning discount factor γ= 0.98. The number of 
actor learner threads is 4, so the expected number of training steps per 
Fig. 2. Asynchronous n-step Q-Learning algorithm per actor-learner thread.  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
5
thread is 1200. The key parameter n-step is 10, that is, each thread ac-
cumulates the updated amount of each action, and updates it to the 
original network parameters. 
after reaching 10 steps. During the training process, ϵ adopts an 
exponential decay method, which decays to a minimum value of 0.05 
after 3200 steps. The optimizer uses RmsProp with a learning rate of 
0.001. 
3.1.3. Changes in training metrics 
The training process will be analyzed below. The parameters of the 
target network are updated asynchronously by different actor-learner 
threads, and because the Async n-step QL algorithm uses a multi- 
thread implementation method, it may lead to large differences in the 
training progress between threads. The learning process is also asyn-
chronous among different agents, so the maximum number of training 
rounds for each agent may vary. Fig. 3. (a) shows the variation of the 
network score of an agent in the Async n-step QL algorithm with the 
training time. It can be seen that a local optimum appears around the 5th 
round and reaches convergence after about 20 training rounds. Fig. 3. 
(b) shows the change in reward value during the learning process. The 
change of the reward of the agent using the Async n-step QL during the 
training process does not have an obvious upward or downward trend, 
which indicates that the competition between different power plants is 
more intense. 
3.2. Intelligent strategic bidding using multi-agent simulation 
3.2.1. The simulation steps of multi-agent simulation (MAS) process 
Step 1: Determine the initial state of the simulation and when to 
terminate it. 
Step 2: Identify key metrics during the simulation. 
Step 3: In each period of simulation, each agent obtains the envi-
ronmental state s obtained by observation, and then takes the next ac-
tion ai= пi(s|θi) according to the strategy generated by the neural 
network obtained by the respective training, obtains the actual single- 
step return ri of environmental feedback, and advances the environ-
ment move to the next state s′. 
Step 4: Step 3 loops continuously until the simulation terminates. 
3.2.2. Implementation tools for multi-agent simulation 
In this paper, AnyLogic software is used to implement multiagent- 
based simulation modeling tasks. AnyLogic can support three main-
stream modeling and simulation methods simultaneously: Discrete- 
Event Modeling (DEM), Agent-Based Modeling (ABM), and System Dy-
namics Modeling(SDM). In addition, AnyLogic contains various 
industry-specific class libraries and is currently the only simulation 
software that can support industrial-strength multi-agent modeling 
[30]. Based on Eclipse, AnyLogic can be customized with various classes 
and functions using the Java language to implement user-specific fea-
tures. At the same time, the changes in different variables are dynami-
cally monitored and displayed during the simulation process. 
3.2.3. The MAS model of intelligent strategic bidding 
Based on the theoretical framework of intelligent strategic bidding in 
electricity markets, the simulation methods of intelligent strategic bid-
ding based on DRL are studied. and three DRL algorithms are applied to 
the MAS model. In the MAS model established in this paper, we set up 
eight power plant agents and one ISO agent. Each power plant agent 
submits a bid price to ISO in each bidding round, and ISO releases the 
market clearing price and winning information to each power plant 
agent after clearing. The market maximum bidding price is set to 20 
USD/MWh, and the settings of power plants are set as Table 1 [8]: 
We set the average winning prices of each bidding round as the state 
space, the bidding behavior of each power plant agent as its respective 
action space, and the profit each power plant makes in each bidding 
round as its reward from the environment. Next, the value interval [Pmin, 
Pmax] of the average winning price is discretized into 20 equal parts, 
each length d= (Pmax-Pmin)/20. The average winning price p∈(Pmin+id, 
Pmin+(i+ 1)d] corresponds to state i, i= 0, 1,⋯, 19. The state is then 
transformed into a 20-dimensional one-hot vector as the input to the 
deep neural network. 
The bidding action of one power plant consists of the electricity 
bidding price and the electricity bidding volumes. The bidding price of a 
power plant is taken as [mc, P], where mc is the marginal cost of the 
power plant, and P is the maximum bidding price specified by the 
market. Similarly, the bid price range is divided into 20 equal parts, each 
with length d= (P-mc)/20. Therefore, taking action j represents a 
random bid price in the interval (mc+ jd, mc+(j+ 1)d], where j= 0, 1, 
⋯, 19. And the output of the deep neural network is a 20-dimensional 
Fig. 3. a) Average network score change b) Average return value change.  
Table 1 
Intrinsic parameter setting of each power plant agent.  
Power plant i Maximum electricity generation (MWh) Cost (USD/MWh) 
Gen1  30  8 
Gen2  40  9 
Gen3  50  8 
Gen4  30  10 
Gen5  40  8 
Gen6  50  11 
Gen7  60  8 
Gen8  40  9  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
6
vector representing the probability distribution of taking each action. 
The following mathematical model is established for the market 
clearing process based on the MCP bidding mechanism. Assume that the 
bidding price and bidding volumes of power plant i are pi and qi, and the 
actual electricity clearing price and electricity volumes are pi′ and qi′, the 
total market demand is Q, and pc is the market clearing price. We can 
assume that the result of ranking from minimum to maximum according 
to the bidding price is p1 < p2 < ⋯ < pn. Since randomness is introduced 
in the definition of actions, and the probability value and measurement 
value of a single point are both 0, so the quotations proposed by different 
power plant agents are not equal, so there will exist a continuous in-
cremental. Then there are Eq.(1)-eq.(3): 
pc = pi (1)  
s.t.
∑i  1
j=1
qj < Q (2)  
∑i
j=1
qj ≥ Q (3)  
n is the number of power plants satisfied 1⩽i⩽n. And winning prices and 
volumes of each power plant are as Eq. (4) and eq. (5): 
q′
i =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
qi, pi < pc
Q 
∑i  1
j=1qj, pi = pc
0, pi > pc
(4)  
p′
i = pc, pi ≤ pc (5) 
The profit of power plant i can be expressed as Eq. (6)： 
ri =
 
p′
i  mci
)
q′
i (6) 
The deep neural network-based strategy training task in intelligent 
strategic bidding simulation models for competitive electricity markets 
can be implemented using the DRL. In DRL, a parameterized deep neural 
network Q(s, a; θ) is used to approximate the value function. Taking the 
DQN as an example, the observation of states is preprocessed as Eq. (7). 
ϕt = ϕ(st) (7) 
Then in each time step, the action at is selected according to the 
ϵ-greedy strategy and executed in the Markov decision process to obtain 
the single-step payoff and the next state. Subsequently, the quaternion 
(фt, at, at, фt+1) is stored in D as an experience in the learning process and 
the experience is sampled randomly. The target value of the value 
estimation is Eq. (8). 
y= r+ γmax
a′
Q
(
s′, a′|θ) (8) 
After that, we can use the Mean-Square Error(MSE) between the 
target value and the current value to represent the loss function, and 
then update the network parameters θ by optimizing the loss function by 
gradient descent, as in Eq. (9). 
L(θ)= 1
N
∑N
j=1
 
yj  Q
 
ϕj, aj; θ
))2
(9)  
where N is the number of samples in the experience reply. The hyper-
parameter ϵ is set using the annealing algorithm during the training 
process. This indicates that a larger ϵ in the early stage of training can 
ensure the full exploration of the whole action space. As the training 
process advances, the value of ϵ is gradually reduced to make full use of 
experience rather than random actions to achieve a balance between 
exploring possibilities and using knowledge. 
3.3. Intelligent strategic simulation model using DRL algorithms and MAS 
In the MAS experiment, 1000 bidding cycles are set, so that all agents 
bid randomly throughout the action space with probability ϵ= 0.05 in 
each bidding cycle, and the remaining time is based on the strategy 
network obtained by training. 
To compare the responsiveness of intelligent bidding strategies to the 
market demand, the market demand to total supply is set to 50%, 60%, 
70%, 80%, 90% when t∈(0200], t∈(200,400], t∈(400,600], t∈
(600,800], t∈(800,1000], respectively. Since the buyers’ demand is 
rigid, the supply-demand ratio has a more obvious impact on the elec-
tricity market. The above-mentioned simulation scenario setting is to 
make the market have different supply-demand levels in different time 
periods. 
Next, we will analyze the bidding strategies and bidding results of 
power plants under different supply and demand levels from qualitative 
and quantitative perspectives, and analyze and evaluate the market 
revenue at the same time. 
3.3.1. Qualitative analysis of intelligent strategic bidding based on Async n- 
step QL and MAS 
The variation of the variables in the simulation of applying the Async 
n-step QL to strategic bidding in competitive electricity markets is 
shown in Fig. 4–7, in which the horizontal axis represents the number of 
market clearings and the vertical axis represents the different prices 
(USD/MWh). 
It can be seen that as the market demand increases, market clearing 
prices and the total revenue on the electricity selling side increase 
significantly, average winning prices of power plants increase slightly, 
while the change in average bidding prices is not significant. 
In addition, due to the ϵ-greedy principle for power plants quotation, 
the existence of the random exploration factor makes the algorithm 
fluctuate even when it is stable, and the simulation becomes unstable as 
the total market demand converges to the total power plant supply 
volumes and the fluctuation range of each index is greater. 
3.3.2. Quantitative analysis of intelligent strategic bidding based on Async 
n-step QL and MAS 
The quantitative changes of each variable in the electricity market 
based on Async n-step QL algorithm in the simulation experiment are 
shown in Table 2. 
When t= 200, 600, the growth rates of total revenue on the elec-
tricity selling side are 96.2% and 74.5%, respectively, and the growth 
rates of market clearing prices are 22.1% and 23.0%, respectively, 
showing a relatively large growth rate. This indicates that some of the 
higher quotations plants start to take the bidding initiative at this time. 
The growth in both trading volumes and clearing prices result in a sig-
nificant increase in total revenue on the electricity selling side. When 
t= 400, 800, the growth rates of the total revenue on the electricity 
selling side are 13.7% and 15.3%, respectively, and the growth rates of 
the market clearing prices are 0.9% and 1.0%, respectively, which is 
smaller. This indicates that the main influencing factor leading to the 
Fig. 4. Average winning price.  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
7
change of the revenue on the electricity selling side is the increase of 
trading volume. Among them, the agent at t= 400 prefer conservative 
bidding, while the insignificant change at t= 800 mainly stems from the 
decrease in the reliability of simulation experiments due to the tension 
between supply and demand. 
4. Comparative analysis of the MAS Model based on three classic 
DRL algorithms 
The comparative analysis of the performance of the MAS model 
based on three classic DRL algorithms are carried out in this section. 
three MAS models based on DQN algorithm, DDQN algorithm and Async 
n-step QL algorithm are compared and analyzed in terms of computa-
tional efficiency, convergence speed, and responsiveness to demand 
changes. 
4.1. Computational efficiency and convergence speed 
The number of training rounds of DQN algorithm and DDQN algo-
rithm is set to 50, with 100 iterations per round, i.e., each agent per-
forms 5000 iterations of training simultaneously. Since there are 
multiple asynchronous learning threads inside the agent in the Async n- 
step QL algorithm, all learning threads of each agent are set to iterate 
5000 steps in total, and each round of training iterates 100 times. We 
recorded the running time and convergence time of the three training 
algorithms and calculated the average computational speed of each al-
gorithm. The results are shown in Table 3: 
From Table 3, we observed that the MAS model based on DQN has 
the fastest convergence and computational speed. The MAS model based 
on DDQN has a slower convergence speed and computational speed due 
to the difference between the current and target networks. The 
convergence speed and computational speed of the MAS model based on 
the Async n-step QL algorithm are moderate. 
4.2. Responsiveness to changes in supply and demand 
To study the responsiveness of the three DRL algorithms to the 
supply and demand changes of the multi-agent simulation in the elec-
tricity market, we conducted three training simulation experiments to 
analyze each of the three algorithms. The ratio of total market electricity 
demand to power plant supply volumes was set to 50%, 70%, and 90% in 
the three-disk of experiments, and remained unchanged during the 
training and simulation process. 
Fig. 5. Total power plants revenue.  
Fig. 6. Average bidding price.  
Fig. 7. Market clearing price.  
Table 2 
The main variables of the electricity market under different demand-to-supply ratios using the Async n-step QL algorithm.  
Time  0-200 200-400 400-600 600-800 800-1000 
Supply Value(MWh)  340  340  340  340  340 
Demand-to-supply ratio  50%  60%  70%  80%  90% 
Load Value(MWh)  170  204  238  272  306 
Growth rate  0%  20%  16.7%  14.3%  12.5% 
Total revenue Value(USD)  696.5  1366.4  1554.2  2711.8  3127.1 
Growth rate  0%  96.2%  13.7%  74.5%  15.3% 
AWP Value(USD/MWh)  10.72  11.03  11.61  12.49  13.36 
Growth rate  0%  2.89%  5.26%  7.58%  6.97% 
ABP Value(USD/MWh)  13.77  13.73  13.68  13.82  13.95 
Growth rate  0%  -0.29%  -0.36%  1.02%  0.94% 
MCP Value(USD/MWh)  12.44  15.19  15.32  18.85  19.04 
Growth rate  0%  22.1%  0.9%  23.0%  1.0%  
Table 3 
Comparison of computational efficiency and convergence speed of MAS model 
based on the deep reinforcement learning algorithm.  
Algorithms Training 
rounds 
Iteration 
steps 
Running 
time (s) 
Convergence 
rounds 
Speed 
(s/ 
round) 
DQN  50  5000  225  32  4.5 
DDQN  50  5000  262  40  5.2 
Async n-step 
QL  
50  5000  250  38  5.0  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
8
4.2.1. Qualitative analysis 
For the bidding simulation methods based on the DQN, DDQN, and 
Async n-step QL, Average Winning Prices (AWPs), Average Bidding 
Prices (ABPs), and Market Clearing Prices (MCPs) in three-disk experi-
ments can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 8.~Fig. 10. 
We observed that applying all three training algorithms led the 
market to an equilibrium steady state. As the ratio of electricity demand 
to total supply volumes increases, average winning prices and market 
clearing prices in the market both increase accordingly. In turn, an in-
crease in the demand-to-supply ratios leads to higher electricity trading 
volumes and market clearing prices, both of which, in turn, lead to a rise 
in the total revenue on the electricity selling side of the market. It is 
worth mentioning that the random fluctuations of the variables in  
Figs. 8–10 come from the setting of the random exploration probability ϵ 
= 0.05. 
4.2.2. Quantitative analysis 
Table 4 shows the quantitative variation of market parameters with 
the demand-to-supply ratio in the multi-agent simulation model based 
on three classic deep reinforcement learning algorithms. 
For the DQN algorithm, at the lower level of 50% demand-to-supply 
ratio, its average winning price, average bidding price, and market 
clearing price are $11.9, $14.1, and $13.2, respectively, which are the 
highest among the three algorithms. As the demand-to-supply ratio in-
creases, average winning. 
prices and market clearing prices increase significantly with growth 
rates of 5.9% and 7.1%, 19.7% and. 
23.4% when the demand-to-supply ratio increases to 70% and 90%, 
respectively, whereas the average. 
bidding prices remain unchanged. When the demand-to-supply ratio 
reaches 90%, market clearing prices reach $19.5, which is very close to 
the market limit of $20 maximum bid price, and the operational status of 
the market becomes unstable due to the tense supply demand. We can 
conclude that the bidding strategies of the DQN are more aggressive. 
In contrast, when the electricity demand reaches 50% of the supply 
with the DDQN, its average winning price, average bidding price, and 
market clearing price are $10.4, $12.8, and $12.6, which are the lowest 
among the three algorithms. As the demand increases, the average 
winning price and clearing price also increase with growth rates of 6.7% 
and 10.8%, 11.9%, and 26.2% when the demand-supply ratio increases 
to 70% and 90%, respectively, and the average bidding price remains 
unchanged. At the demand-to-supply ratio of 90%, the market clearing 
price is $17.8, which is lower than the others and leads to the lowest 
total revenue of the three algorithms in electricity sellers. Therefore, we 
observed that the bidding strategies of the DDQN are more conservative 
and can provide a more reliable solution with tight supply-demand 
while losing some revenue. 
At a demand-to-supply ratio of 50%, the average winning price and 
the market clearing price using the Async n-step QL are $10.7 and $12.3, 
respectively, at a lower initial level, which is similar to DDQN, whereas 
the average bidding price is $13.8, which is similar to the values of the 
DQN. When the ratio increases to 70% and 90%, its average winning 
prices increase to $11.6 and $13.4, and the market clearing prices in-
crease to $15.4 and $18.9, with the highest growth rates of 8.4% and 
15.5%, 25.2% and 22.7% in the three methods. In the case of supply- 
demand tension, the market clearing price is $18.9, which is between 
the DQN and the DDQN. So we can conclude that the Async n-step QL 
can provide conservative bidding strategies when demand-to-supply 
ratios are relatively low. And as the demand rises, market indicators 
grow with it and become more responsive to changes in demand-to- 
supply ratios, which can lead to more considerable revenue on the 
electricity selling side. At the same time, the highest bidding price close 
to the market regulation does not occur when the supply-demand rela-
tionship is tight, thus ensuring the stability of the market operation and 
the reliability of the simulation results. 
Compared with the other two algorithms, the convergence speed and 
computational speed of Async n-step QL are moderate, but they show 
higher sensitivity to market demand changes. And on the premise of 
ensuring the stability of market bidding, using the Async n-step QL can 
also obtain a higher total revenue on the selling side when supply and 
demand are tight. Therefore, the Async n-step QL learning algorithm has 
more advantages in the multi-agent simulation model of electricity 
market bidding established in this paper. 
5. Improved Async n-step QL algorithm and performance 
analysis of the MAS model based on it 
The Async n-step QL algorithm with the best performance is 
improved in this section, and its performance in the intelligent strategic 
simulation model is compared with the benchmark Async n-step QL 
algorithm. 
5.1. Improvement of Async n-step QL algorithm 
In the study applying the classic Async n-step QL algorithm, the key 
factor of supply-demand ratio was not added into the training process as 
part of the environment observation. Therefore, in the study of this 
section, the state space is modified as a vector of four continuous vari-
ables, i.e., S= {x1, x2, x3, x4}, where x1, x2, and x3 are the average 
winning price, average bidding price, and market clearing price, 
respectively, and x4 is the ratio of the market electricity demand to the 
total supply volumes of all power plants. Such a setting can avoid too 
sparse observations of the environment while enabling the influence of 
the demand-supply ratio on bidding behaviors to be considered by the 
trained bidding strategies. Referring to the latest method proposed in 
[13], the goal of reinforcement learning: the signal that needs to maxi-
mize the reward is defined, as shown in Eq. (10). 
Fig. 8. a) DQN AWPs b) DQN ABPs c) DQN MCPs.  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
9
ri =
{
lp
 
proi  proc
i
)
proi > proc
i
ln
 
proi  proc
i
)
proi ≤ proc
i
(10)  
where proi is the actual profit obtained by agent i, and proi
c is the 
benchmark profit obtained by the strategies without learning algo-
rithms. lp and ln are proportional coefficients used to control the balance 
between positive rewards and negative penalties, respectively. This 
paper assumes that the bidding and clearing rules of the electricity 
market, as well as the historical quotation and clearing information of 
other power plants, are completely visible to any power plant in the 
market. In a round of bidding, the agent observes the state st and takes 
the quotation action at according to the policy network, and the actual 
revenue obtained is proi. After taking the quotation action at, use the 
historical quotation information and clearing rules of other power plants 
to carry out a simulated market clearing, and the calculated benchmark 
profit is proi
c. 
Network structure and hyperparameters are set as in 3.1.2. During 
the training of the Improved Async n-step QL (IAsync n-step QL) algo-
rithm, the adjustment of the demand amount is set every 50 rounds. The 
demand-to-supply ratio is then varied periodically from 50% to 90% 
with a 10% change gradient to ensure that the algorithm has approxi-
mately the same probability of exploration at different demand levels. 
The parameters lp, ln for profit and return value calculation are 1.45 and 
1.05, respectively. 
5.2. Multi-agent simulation of intelligent strategic bidding based on 
IAsync n-step QL 
By observing the changes in key indicators of the electricity market 
in 1000 bidding rounds, Figs. 11–14 can be obtained. And the horizontal 
axis in Figs. 11–14 represents the number of market clearings and the 
vertical axis represents the different prices (USD/MWh), respectively. 
It can be seen that after several times of clearing, the market has 
generally reached a stable state, and the tendency of bidding strategies 
Fig. 9. a) DDQN AWPs b) DDQN ABPs c) DDQN MCPs.  
Fig. 10. a) Async n-step QL AWPs b) Async n-step QL ABPs c) Async n-step QL MCPs.  
Table 4 
Comparison of key indicators in multi-agent simulation models based on three classic deep reinforcement learning algorithms.  
Algorithm DQN DDQN Async n-step QL 
Number   01  02  03  01  02  03  01  02  03 
Load Value(MWh)  170  238  306  170  238  306  170  238  306 
Growth rate    50%  28.6%    50%  28.6%    50%  28.6% 
AWP Value (USD/MWh)  11.9  12.6  13.5  10.4  11.1  12.3  10.7  11.6  13.4 
Growth rate    5.9%  7.1%    6.7%  10.8%    8.4%  15.5% 
ABP Value (USD/MWh)  14.1  14.1  14.1  12.8  12.7  12.9  13.8  13.7  13.9 
Growth rate    0.5%  -0.4%    -0.8%  1.5%    -0.7%  1.5% 
MCP Value (USD/MWh)  13.2  15.8  19.5  12.6  14.1  17.8  12.3  15.4  18.9 
Growth rate    19.7%  23.4%    11.9%  26.2%    25.2%  22.7% 
Total Revenue Value (USD)  787.4  1694.9  3239.1  637.8  1271.7  2695.5  696.5  1554.2  3127.1 
Growth rate    115.3%  91.1%    99.4%  120%    123.1%  101%  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
10
has also stabilized, but there is still some randomness. All indicators in 
the market show a state of shock, but compared with the other three 
classic DRL algorithms, the amplitude is smaller. 
Both the average winning price and the market clearing price have 
risen steadily, with larger increases when electricity demand improves. 
The market-clearing price increases with the increase of the demand- 
supply ratio, and there is a more obvious rise at t= 600, and it is 
generally stable at t∈[600,1000], and at this time, there is still some 
distance between the highest bidding price defined by the market. 
And the change trend of the total revenue of power plants is the same 
as the change trend of the market clearing price. 
The quantitative changes of each metric are shown in Table 5. We 
observed that in the multi-agent simulation experiment with the IAsync 
n-step QL algorithm, average winning prices and market clearing prices 
increase steadily with market demand changes. In contrast, average 
bidding prices fluctuate in a small range of around $14.3. The increase in 
the demand-to-supply ratio leads to a simultaneous increase in the 
trading price and volumes, which contribute to the growth of the total 
revenue on the electricity selling side. Second, when market demand is 
low, agents tend to make higher aggressive quotations in multi-agent 
simulation; conversely, the market clearing price is $18.1, which is 
still some distance from the maximum bidding price stipulated by the 
market, ensuring the stability of the bidding market and the reliability of 
the simulation. 
5.3. Performance analysis of MAS model based on IAsync n-step QL 
algorithm 
The proposed IAsync n-step QL algorithm is validated by three-disk 
multi-agent simulations with 50%, 70%, and 90% demand-to-supply 
ratios in the electricity market in each simulation round, and  
Fig. 15–17. can be obtained. 
Table 6 shows the quantitative variation of electricity market key 
indicators with different demand-to-supply ratios in the multi-agent 
simulation experiment based on three classic deep reinforcement 
learning algorithms. 
We can conclude that at low levels of market demand, the average 
winning price, average bidding price, and market clearing price using 
the IAsync n-step QL are $11.9, $14.4, and $15.2, respectively, all 
higher than the $10.7, $13.8, and $12.3 using the Async n-step QL al-
gorithm. This illustrates that the improved algorithm is consistent with 
the DQN algorithm when the demand-to-supply ratio is low and can 
capture the highest possible profit by encouraging power plants to adopt 
aggressive quotation strategies. At high levels of market demand, the 
average winning price and average bidding price of the improved al-
gorithm are $13.9 and $14.3, respectively, higher than the $13.4 and 
$13.9 of the Async n-step QL algorithm. However, the market clearing 
price in the improved algorithm is $18.1, which is lower than the $18.9 
of the benchmark algorithm, which indicates that the improved algo-
rithm tends to provide more conservative bidding strategies when the 
market demand is high. The supply-demand relationship is tight to 
ensure further the stability of the market as well as the reliability of the 
multi-agent simulation results. 
In summary, the multi-agent simulation based on the IAsync n-step 
QL algorithm proposed in this paper can further improve the profit-
ability of power plant agents when the market demand is low and pro-
mote market competition by encouraging aggressive quotations. In the 
case of supply-demand tension, the multi-agent simulation based on the 
IAsync n-step QL algorithm can tighten quotation strategies at the right 
time to ensure the stability and balance of the market, which is of 
practical significance for us to carry out macro regulation on the elec-
tricity selling side. In addition, in terms of responsiveness, compared 
with the simulation models based on three deep reinforcement learning 
algorithms, the multi-agent simulation based on the Iasync n-step QL 
algorithm is more timely in responding to changes in market demand, 
and the key indicators in the market are roughly linearly to demand-to- 
supply ratio, and this intelligent bidding strategies with more stable 
sensitivity is more valuable for power plants in the actual electricity 
market. 
6. Conclusion 
Multi-agent Simulation (MAS), an efficient method for studying 
complex systems, is also used to study strategic bidding in competitive 
electricity markets. And how to make the agent intelligent, however, is 
Fig. 11. Average winning price.  
Fig. 12. Total power plant revenue.  
Fig. 13. Average bidding price.  
Fig. 14. Market clearing price.  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
11
the main concern and difficulty of multi-agent simulation. Existing 
research usually combines Multi-agent Simulation (MAS) and Rein-
forcement Learning (RL) algorithms to solve this problem, but it is often 
limited in practical applications. Deep Learning (DL) enables rein-
forcement learning to extend to previously difficult decision-making 
problems, that is, environments with high-dimensional states and ac-
tion spaces. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), which combines deep 
neural networks and reinforcement learning, has become a research 
hotspot. Therefore, this study investigates intelligent strategic bidding 
using MAS and DRL. 
Aiming at the lack of comprehension of agents in Multi-Agent 
Simulation (MAS) based on classic Reinforcement Learning algorithms 
of competitive electricity markets. A novel theoretical framework for 
intelligent strategic bidding in competitive electricity markets is pro-
posed. This framework implements DRL-based intelligent strategic 
bidding in competitive electricity markets and acts as an architecture 
framework for research on strategic bidding in competitive electricity 
markets. Three multi-agent simulation models of intelligent strategic 
bidding in competitive electricity markets are established based on three 
value-based DRL algorithms. Furthermore, comparing and analyzing 
three MAS models’ convergence speed, computational efficiency, and 
response sensitivity using the three DRL algorithms, including DQN, 
Double DQN, and Async n-step QL. 
An Improved Async n-step QL (IAsync n-step QL) algorithm is pro-
posed, and a multi-agent simulation model based on a novel IAsync n- 
step QL algorithm for intelligent strategic bidding in the competitive 
electricity market is established. By running the model, the effectiveness 
of the multi-agent simulation model based on the improved algorithm is 
verified, and a more stable response sensitivity is obtained. The multi- 
agent simulation model based on the novel IAsync n-step QL is supe-
rior to the MAS model based on the other three DRL algorithms. 
Strategic bidding behaviors of competitive electricity markets are 
studied in this paper using MAS and DRL, particularly the strategic 
intelligent learning behaviors of electricity sellers. This study not only 
provides the government or companies with methods and tools to create 
better market mechanisms but also provides support for the healthy 
development of a competitive electricity market. 
The IAsync n-step QL algorithm proposed in this paper can be 
extended in these aspects: as there are many different domains[40] 
where advanced optimization algorithms have been applied as solution 
approaches, and in electricity market, it also has been well applied in the 
short-term load forecasting[41] and so on. Therefore, in the future 
Table 5 
Comparison of key indicators in multi-agent simulation models based on the improved async n-step QL algorithm.  
Time  0-200 200-400 400-600 600-800 800-1000 
Load Value(MWh)  170  204  238  272  306 
Growth rate  0%  20%  16.7%  14.3%  12.5% 
Total revenue Value (USD)  1055.1  1396.7  1673.8  2264.4  2829.2 
Growth rate  0%  32.4%  19.9%  35.3%  24.9% 
AWP Value (USD/MWh)  11.79  12.43  12.91  13.48  13.96 
Growth rate  0%  5.43%  3.86%  4.42%  3.56% 
ABP Value (USD/MWh)  14.30  14.33  14.30  14.34  14.38 
Growth rate  0%  0.21%  0.21%  0.28%  0.28% 
MCP Value (USD/MWh)  15.18  16.02  16.68  17.25  18.10 
Growth rate  0%  5.5%  4.1%  3.4%  4.9%  
Fig. 15. AWPs of three-disk simulation.  
Fig. 16. ABPs of three-disk simulation.  
Fig. 17. MCPs of three-disk simulation.  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
12
research, the advanced optimization algorithms, such as new types of 
hybrid heuristics and metaheuristics[42], adaptive algorithms[43], etc., 
can be combined with the IAsync n-step QL algorithm to simulate the 
bidding behavior of the electricity selling side in competitive electricity 
markets. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Conceptualization, Jiahui Wu and Jidong Wang. methodology, 
Jiahui Wu and Jidong Wang. software, Jiahui Wu. validation, Jiahui 
Wu and Jidong Wang. formal analysis, Jiahui Wu. investigation, 
Jiahui Wu. resources, Jidong Wang. data curation, Jidong Wang. 
writing—original draft preparation, Jiahui Wu. writing—review and 
editing, Xiangyu Kong. visualization, Jiahui Wu. supervision, Jidong 
Wang. project administration, Xiangyu Kong. funding acquisition, 
Xiangyu Kong. All authors have read and agreed to the published 
version of the manuscript. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
We wish to draw the attention of the Editor to the following facts 
which may be considered as potential conflicts of interest and to sig-
nificant financial contributions to this work. 
We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all 
named authors and that there are no other persons who satisfied the 
criteria for authorship but are not listed. We further confirm that the 
order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of us. 
We confirm that we have given due consideration to the protection of 
intellectual property associated with this work and that there are no 
impediments to publication, including the timing of publication, with 
respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we have 
followed the regulations of our institutions concerning intellectual 
property. 
We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative in-
terest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work 
submitted. 
We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact for 
the Editorial process (including Editorial Manager and direct commu-
nications with the office). He is responsible for communicating with the 
other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final 
approval of proofs. We confirm that we have provided a current, correct 
email address which is accessible by the Corresponding Author and 
which has been configured to accept email from “Applied Soft 
Computing”. 
Data availability 
The authors do not have permission to share data. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and 
Development Program of China (2021YFB2401200). 
References 
[1] Y.F. Zhang, Z.X. Ju, The development of domestic electricity sales companies, Light 
Ind. Sci. Technol. 37 (6) (2021) 129–130. 
[2] Z.X. Li, Analysis of the current situation and development direction of domestic 
electricity sales companies, China Electr. Power Enterp. Manag. (2020) 52–53. 
[3] P. Kiran, K.R.M. Vijaya Chandrakala, New interactive agent based reinforcement 
learning approach towards smart generator bidding in electricity market with 
micro grid integration, Appl. Soft Comput. 97 (2020) 106762. 
[4] J. Vijaya Kumar, D.M. Vinod Kumar, Generation bidding strategy in a pool based 
electricity market using shuffled frog leaping algorithm, Appl. Soft Comput. 21 
(2014) 407–414. 
[5] Forhad Zaman, Saber M. Elsayed, Tapabrata Ray, Ruhul A. Sarker, Co-evolutionary 
approach for strategic bidding in competitive electricity markets, Appl. Soft 
Comput. 51 (2017) 1–22. 
[6] Akash Saxena, Bhanu Pratap Soni, Rajesh Kumar, Vikas Gupta, Intelligent grey 
wolf optimizer – development and application for strategic bidding in uniform 
price spot energy market, Appl. Soft Comput. 69 (2018) 1–13. 
[7] J.D. Wang, J.H. Wu, Y.B. Che, Agent and system dynamics-based hybrid modeling 
and simulation for multilateral bidding in electricity market, Energy 180 (2019) 
444–456. 
[8] J.D. Wang, J.H. Wu, X.Y. Kong, Multi-agent simulation for strategic bidding in 
electricity markets using reinforcement learning, CSEE JPES (2021) 1–13. 
[9] D.W. Qiu, Y. Wang, T.Q. Zhang, M.Y. Sun, G. Strbac, Hybrid multiagent 
reinforcement learning for electric vehicle resilience control towards a low-carbon 
transition, IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat 18 (11) (2022) 8258–8369. 
[10] M. Ahrarinouri, M. Rastegar, P. Siano, Multiagent reinforcement learning for 
energy management in residential buildings, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 17 (1) (2021) 
659–666. 
[11] Y.C. Liang, C.L. Guo, Z.H. Ding, H.C. Hua, Agent-based modeling in electricity 
market using deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm, IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 
35 (6) (2020) 4180–4192. 
[12] T. Qian, C.C. Shao, X.L. Li, X.L. Wang, Z.P. Chen, M. Shahidehpour, Multi-agent 
deep reinforcement learning method for EV charging station game, IEEE Trans. 
Power Syst. 37 (3) (2022) 1682–1694. 
[13] Y.J. Ye, D.W. Qiu, M.Y. Sun, D. Papadaskalopoulos, G. Strbac, Deep reinforcement 
learning for strategic bidding in electricity markets, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 11 (2) 
(2020) 1343–1355. 
[14] Y.X. Li “Deep reinforcement learning: An overview,” arXiv:1810.06339 [cs.LG], 
Oct. 2018. 
[15] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, 
M. Riedmiller, Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, NIPS Deep Learn. 
Workshop (2013) 1–9. 
[16] H.V. Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, Deep reinforcement learning with double Q- 
learning, In: Proceedings of the 16th AAAI Conference On Artificial Intelligence, 
pp.2094–2100, Feb. 2016. 
[17] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, D. Silver, Prioritized experience replay, ICLR 
(2016) 1–21. 
[18] Z.Y. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H.V. Hasselt, M. Lanctot, N.D. Freitas, Dueling 
network architectures for deep reinforcement learning, Proc. 33rd ICML 48 (2016) 
1995–2003. 
[19] V.R. Konda, J.N. Tsitsiklis, Actor-critic algorithms, Adv. NIPS (1999) 1008–1014. 
[20] N. Casas, Deep deterministic policy gradient for urban traffic light control, Neural 
Evolut. Comput. [cs. NE] (2017) 1–12. 
[21] V. Mnih, A.P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Harley, T.P. Lillicrap, D. Silver, 
K. Kavukcuoglu, Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning, Proc. 
33rd ICML (2016) 1928–1937. 
[22] S.M.J. Jalali, S. Ahmadian, A. Khosravi, M. Shafie-khah, S. Nahavandi, J.P. 
S. Catal˜ao, A novel evolutionary-based deep convolutional neural network model 
for intelligent load forecasting, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 17 (12) (2021) 8243–8253. 
Table 6 
Comparison of key indicators in multi-agent simulation models based on the improved async n-step QL algorithm and classic async n-step algorithm.  
Algorithm  IAsync n-step QL Async n-step QL 
Number   01  02  03  01  02  03 
Load Value(MWh)  170  238  306  170  238  306 
Growth rate    50%  28.6%    50%  28.6% 
AWP Value (USD/MWh)  11.9  13.0  13.9  10.7  11.6  13.4 
Growth rate    9.2%  6.9%    8.4%  15.5% 
ABP Value (USD/MWh)  14.4  14.3  14.3  13.8  13.7  13.9 
Growth rate    -0.8%  0.3%    -0.7%  1.5% 
MCP Value (USD/MWh)  15.2  16.6  18.1  12.3  15.4  18.9 
Growth rate    9.2%  9.0%    25.2%  22.7% 
Total revenue Value (USD)  1066.6  1692.2  2831.1  696.5  1554.2  3127.1 
Growth rate    58.7%  67.3%    123.1%  101%  
J. Wu et al.

Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111235
13
[23] Y.J. Xu, X. Zhang, P.Y. Meng, A novel intelligent deep learning-based uncertainty- 
guided network training in market price, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 18 (8) (2022) 
5705–5711. 
[24] Y.C. Tao, J. Qiu, S.Y. Lai, Deep reinforcement learning based bidding strategy for 
EVAs in local energy market considering information asymmetry, IEEE Trans. Ind. 
Inf. 18 (6) (2022) 3831–3842. 
[25] Y.K. Liu, D.X. Zhang, H.B. Gooi, Data-driven decision-making strategies for 
electricity retailers: a deep reinforcement learning approach, CSEE JPES 7 (2021) 
358–367. 
[26] S. Jia, Z.X. Gan, Y.G. Xi, D.W. Li, S.B. Xue, L.M. Wang, A deep reinforcement 
learning bidding algorithm on electricity market, J. Therm. Sci. 29 (2021) 
1125–1134. 
[27] X. Ji, C. Li, D.X. Li, C.L. Qi, Bidding strategy of two-layer optimization model for 
electricity market considering renewable energy based on deep reinforcement 
learning, Electronics 11 (2022) 3107. 
[28] X.Y. Wei, Y. Xiang, J.L. Li, J.Y. Liu, Wind power bidding coordinated with energy 
storage system operation in real-time electricity market: a maximum entropy deep 
reinforcement learning approach, Energy Rep. 8 (2022) 770–775. 
[29] J.N. Wang, C.L. Guo, C.S. Yu, Y.C. Liang, Virtual power plant containing electric 
vehicles scheduling strategies based on deep reinforcement learning, Electr. Power 
Syst. Res. 205 (2022) 107714. 
[30] H.C. Xu, H.B. Sun, D. Nikovski, S. Kitamura, K. Mori, H. Hashimoto, Deep 
reinforcement learning for joint bidding and pricing of load serving entity, IEEE 
Trans. Smart Grid vol. 10 (6) (. 2019) 6366–6375. 
[31] K.Z. Ren, J. Liu, X.L. Liu, Y.X. Nie, Reinforcement Learning-Based Bi-Level strategic 
bidding model of Gas-fired unit in integrated electricity and natural gas markets 
preventing market manipulation, Appl. Energy 336 (2023) 120813. 
[32] S. Jia, Z.X. Gan, Y.G. Xi, D.W. Li, S.B. Xue, L.M. Wang, A deep reinforcement 
learning bidding algorithm on electricity market, J. Therm. Sci. 29 (5) (2020) 
1125–1134. 
[33] Y. Du, F. Li, H. Zandi, Y. Xue, Approximating nash equilibrium in day-ahead 
electricity market bidding with multi-agent deep reinforcement learning, J. Mod. 
Power Syst. Clean. Energy 9 (2021) 534–544. 
[34] Tom´as Ochoa, Esteban Gil, Alejandro Angulo, Carlos Valle, Multi-agent deep 
reinforcement learning for efficient multi-timescale bidding of a hybrid power 
plant in day-ahead and real-time markets, Appl. Energy 317 (2022) 119067. 
[35] Y. Ye, D. Papadaskalopoulos, Q. Yuan, Y. Tang, G. Strbac, Multi-agent deep 
reinforcement learning for coordinated energy trading and flexibility services 
provision in local electricity markets, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 14 (2023) 
1541–1554. 
[36] L. Yan, X. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Wen, A hierarchical deep reinforcement learning-based 
community energy trading scheme for a neighborhood of smart households, IEEE 
Trans. Smart Grid 13 (2022) 4747–4758. 
[37] X. Liu, S. Li, J. Zhu, Optimal coordination for multiple network-constrained VPPs 
via multi-agent deep reinforcement learning, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 14 (4) (2023) 
3016–3031. 
[38] Z.M. Yan, Y. Xu, A multi-agent deep reinforcement learning method for 
cooperative load frequency control of a multi-area power system, IEEE Trans. 
Power Syst. 35 (6) (2020) 4599–4608. 
[39] Z.W. Shi, Market equilibrium analysis under PAB and MCP electricity price 
mechanism, M.S. thesis, Dept. Elect. Eng., Zhejiang Univ., Zhejiang, China, 2006. 
[40] P. Jiang, H.F. Yang, R. Li, C. Li, Inbound tourism demand forecasting framework 
based on fuzzy time series and advanced optimization algorithm, Appl. Soft 
Comput. 92 (2020) 106320. 
[41] Y. Nie, P. Jiang, H.P. Zhang, A novel hybrid model based on combined 
preprocessing method and advanced optimization algorithm for power load 
forecasting, Appl. Soft Comput. 97 (2020) 106809. 
[42] M.A. Lopes Silva, S.R. de Souza, M.J. Freitas Souza, M.F. de França Filho, Hybrid 
metaheuristics and multi-agent systems for solving optimization problems: A 
review of frameworks and a comparative analysis, Appl. Soft Comput. 71 (2018) 
433–459. 
[43] L.J. He, Y.L. Cao, W.F. Li, J.J. Cao, L.C. Zhong, Optimization of energy-efficient 
open shop scheduling with an adaptive multi-objective differential evolution 
algorithm, Appl. Soft Comput. 118 (2022) 108459. 
J. Wu et al.
