Proceedings of the 2009 Winter Simulation Conference 
M. D. Rossetti, R. R. Hill, B. Johansson, A. Dunkin and R. G. Ingalls, eds.  
 
 
 
INTEGRATING AGENT-BASED SIMULATION AND SYSTEM DYNAMICS TO SUPPORT PRODUCT 
STRATEGY DECISIONS IN THE AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY 
 
 
Karsten Kieckhäfer Joachim Axmann Thomas Spengler 
Grit Walther   
   
TU Braunschweig Volkswagen AG TU Braunschweig 
Institute of Automotive Manage-
ment and Industrial Production 
Products Division,  
Dept. of Process Development 
Institute of Automotive Manage-
ment and Industrial Production 
Katharinenstraße 3 Mailbox 1256 Katharinenstraße 3 
Braunschweig, 38106, GERMANY Wolfsburg, 38436, GERMANY Braunschweig, 38106, GERMANY 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Especially in the European Union b oth, regulatory requirements regarding the CO2 emissions of new vehicles and the shor t-
age of crude oil force car manufacturers to introduce alternative fuel and powertrain concepts. Due to high investments and 
long development times as well as the parallel offer of conventional and alternative technologies, an appropriate product 
strategy is required. Car manufacturer s have to decide, which powertrain to introduce at wh ich time in which vehicle class . 
Hence, the aim of this paper is to develop a framework for the analysis of product strategies in the automotive industry with 
special regard to alternative fuel and powertrain technologies. The framework integrates System Dynamics and Agent -based 
Simulation in a simulation environ ment. On basis of this analysis recommendations can be deduced concerning the impl e-
mentation of different product portfolios. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Public discussions concerning the contribution of the t raffic sector on climate change  lead to ever stricter CO2 regulatory re-
quirements in the automotive sector , especially in the European Union . Here, car manufacturers are required to ensure that 
the average emissions of the new vehicle fleet are below a manufacturer specific target . If the average CO2 emissions exceed 
the target, manufacturers have to pay high penalties. Furthermore, increasing fuel prices are expected due to future scarcity of 
crude oil. Hence, car manufacturer s have to reduce CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of passenger cars. However, only 
slight reductions of fuel consumption are possible for conventional passenger cars . Consequently, car manufactures  have to 
develop and introduce alternative fuel and powertrain concepts, in order to comply with legal and customers requirements  in 
the European Union and other regions worldwide.  
High investments and long development times, as well as the parallel offer of conventional and alternative technologies 
require an appropriate product strategy. Due to legal and customers requirements, in particular a strategy has to be developed, 
which considers the offer of a great variety of vehicles, powertrains and fuels. Thus, active decisions about the arrangement 
of different product portfolios including the consideration of substitution effects (on supply and demand) between powertrain  
and fuel technologies, as well as between vehicle classes have to be taken . Thereby, the aim of the manufacturer is to achieve  
required market and financial objectives considering regulatory and public requirements, in order to secure existence of bus i-
ness.  
Regarding to such product strategy decisions, p opular examples for missing market success in Germany are two passe n-
ger cars of the Volkswagen Group. Introduced in the smallest vehicle class in 1997 respectively 1999 , both the Volkswagen 
Lupo and the Audi A2 were offered as fuel economic cars. Based on different measures, such as light construction, start -stop-
function and motor management, a special model of both vehicles has a fuel consumption of only 3 l/100 km. After a positive 
initial response to the offered models, demand broke down, production was stopped and e. g. only 6.500 vehicles of the Audi 
A2 3L were produced ( Figure 1). Nowadays, demand for the Audi A2 3L on the second -hand car market is twice as high as 
supply and the price of a second -hand car is appro ximately 3.000 € higher than the list price. Furthermore, the then new and 
neglected technologies are getting more and more integrated in current vehicles. Hence, it seems that the right technology 
was introduced at the wrong point in time (PwC 2007, Flohr 2008). In order to counteract such economically inefficient strat-
1433
978-1-4244-5771-7/09/$26.00 ©2009 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
egies, a decision support is required, which can deal with the dynamic complex character of the challenge of the introduction 
of alternative powertrain and fuel concepts. 
 
175.000
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Vehicles per year
Lupo
A2
Registration of new cars (Germany): VW Lupo und Audi A2
Total vehicle
production Audi A2
Fraction Audi A2 3L
(6.500)
 
Figure 1: Market development VW Lupo, Audi A2 
 
Against this background, the aim of this paper is the development of a framework for the analysis of product strategies in 
the automotive industry with special regard to alternative fuel and powertrain technologies. T he framework has to allow the 
simulation and analysis of different strategy options of a manufacturer, in order to assess portfolio decisions. To this end , a 
detailed analysis of the socio -economic system is necessary. On basis of this analysis, requiremen ts regarding the develo p-
ment of the framework will be derived.  Afterwards, the framework will be developed considering the interactions between 
vehicle supply and demand, competitor behavior, supply of infrastructure , as well as  macro-economic and regulatory condi-
tions. In order to comply with requirements derived by this framework , System Dynamics and Agent -based Simulation will 
be integrated. 
2 ANALYSIS OF THE AUTOMOTIVE MARKET 
The automotive market is mainly characterized by the interaction of three actors: car manufacturers, customers, and legisla-
ture. While legislature pursues public goals (e.g. reduction of emissions), both the manufacturers (e.g. maximization of profit) 
and at the customers (e.g. economic mobility) pursue individual goals. Thereby, each of these actors has different options of 
action, which are affected by the further groups of interests (Figure 2). 
 
Legislature
Objectives: 
Reduction of 
emissions, …
Customer
Objective: 
Economic 
mobility, …
Manufacturer
Objectives: 
Maximization of 
profit, …
Legal measures concerning 
vehicle offering
Legal measures concerning 
purchase behavior
Purchase behavior
Impact of legal 
measures:
Purchase behavior
Vehicle offering
Impact of legal 
measures:
Vehicle offering
 
Figure 2: System automotive market 
 
Legislature determines the basic conditions in the automotive market. By the employment of legal measures (e. g. incen-
tives, subsidies, malus payments, taxes)  legislature tries to influence both , vehicles offered by the manufacturers and pu r-
chase behavior of the customers. Thereby, decisions of measure depend on the expected reaction of the manufacturers respec-
tively customers. Regarding the regulation on CO2 emissions from cars in the European Union the interaction between the 
two stakeholders can be described as follows: The European, Japanese and Korean car manufacturers ’ associations commit-
ted to reduce  the average CO2 emis sions from new passenger cars to 140 g CO2/km until 2008 or 2009. Since in 2004 the 
average CO2 emissions of new passenger cars were still about 161 g CO2/km and considerable improvements were not e x-
1434
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
pected, the European Commission decided to revise their strategy proposed in 1995. For this reason, the European Commi s-
sion is currently developing  a legislative framework focusing on mandatory measures. From 2012, manufacturers will be r e-
quired to ensure that the average emis sions of the new vehicle fleet are below a manufacturer specific target, which will be 
lowered gradually to 120 and/or 130 g CO2/km until 2018. At the same time, the European Commission forces the adaption 
of a proposal for a directive on passenger car taxation, which aims at calculating the annual tax on motor vehicles on the basis 
of CO2 emissions. Furthermore, an amending proposal for the directive relating to the availability of consumer information 
on fuel economy and CO2 emissions in respect of the ma rketing of new pas senger cars is developed. Similar to the sector of 
household appliances, in the future passenger cars are assigned to energy efficiency classes. This way, sales of more efficient 
and environmentally friendly vehicles shall be increased (EU 2007, EU 2008). 
According to this, legislature’s action forces car manufacturers to adapt the range of vehicles, in order to fulfill regul a-
tory requirements. For this purpose, different options are available to car manufacturers. On the one hand, maintai ning the 
present range of products while decreasing the fuel consumption of conventional gasoline and diesel engines is an option. On 
the other hand, offering a higher number of vehicles in small classes (e.g. Volkwagen Fox, Smart, Toyota Aygo) or  the intro-
duction of alternative powertrain and fuel concepts (e.g. hybrid, electric power train, biofuels) is conceivable  (PwC 2007) . 
The choice on these options leads to  implications, e. g. with regard to forecast of  sales volumes, as well as allocation of re-
search & development and production capacities.  
Referring to the customer, legal measures might have an impact on the purchase behavior, if  influencing factors, which 
are considered by the customer during a purchase decision, are affected and/or information about these factors is made avai l-
able. Factors influencing the purchase decision are hygiene factors (e.  g. security and reliability), technical factors (e.  g. per-
formance, acceleration, range, and fuel consumption), economic factors (e.  g. purchase price a nd running costs), as well as 
emotional factors (e.  g. design and brand). In terms of the amending proposal for the directive relating to the availability of 
consumer information on fuel economy and CO2 emissions, customers must receive information about the vehicle efficiency. 
Hence, customers will  be able to monetarize the technical factor fuel consumption during their purchase decision. Also, the 
annual tax on motor vehicles based on CO2 emissions is expected to increase the impact of fuel consumption on the purchase 
decision. Thus, higher consumption comes along with a higher tax rate and higher running costs. Assuming constant values 
of the further influencing factors (e.  g. performance, purchase price, and range) , sales of less fuel consuming passenger  cars 
should be increased (Gärtner 2005, Lane 2005). 
In order to reach their individual goals, customers and manufacturers interact directly in the automotive market. Due to 
the fact that the automotive market in the European Union is getting more and more  a mature market, the market can be ch a-
racterized as a buyers’ market.  Customers requirements are becoming very diverse and sophisticated while manufacturers 
face high competition. For this reason, car manufacturers expand their model variety. On the one h and, they offer vehicles in 
different vehicle classes. On the other hand, the number of vehicle variants offered in one vehicle class is increased (e.  g. VW 
Golf, VW Golf Plus, VW Golf Variant) (Becker 2007, Schneider 2008). 
The behavior of the different stakeholders in the automotive market is influenced by dynamic and uncertain  basic condi-
tions. Especially basic macro-economic conditions like crude oil prices, income distribution or demographic change have an 
impact (Becker 2007). Furthermore, the competition between transportation  modes (e.g. public passenger traffic), as well as 
the supply of infrastructure respectively energy has to be considered (Struben and Sterman 2007). 
To sum up, car manufacturers are facing the following challenges in the automotive market. Forced by custo mer and 
regulatory requirements as well as changing basic macro -economic conditions, they have to develop an appropriate product 
strategy, in order to achieve business goals. As mentioned above, different options are avail able for the manufacturers (Figure 
3): maintaining the present range of vehicles while decreasing fuel consumption, changing the range of vehicles by increasing 
the number of vehicles supplied in smaller classes, or changing the range of vehicles  by introducing alternative powertrain 
and fuel concepts. Currently, a combination of these options occurs in practice . At short notice, manufacturers are improving 
the fuel consumption of new passenger cars, while in the long run alternative powertrain and fuel con cepts will be applied.  
To succeed with a strategy option, car manufacturers have to come to three major decisions. First, they have to decide 
which powertrain and fuel concepts shall be offered respectively introduced at which time to match with regulator y require-
ments. Here, especially dynamic relations with regard to the diffusion of new technologies have to be considered  (Bass 1969, 
Milling 2002). Second, the offered vehicles have to match with customer requirements in terms of exhibiting the right vehi cle 
characteristics (e. g. performance, range and price) at any time  (Train and Winston 2007) . Third, product interdependencies 
on supply (e. g. complementary relations between different ve hicles and/or powertrains in  production) and demand (e. g. 
substitution effects between different vehicles and/or powertrains) have to be taken into account. Hence, vehicle portfolio d e-
cisions have to be carried out (Devinney and Stewart 1988) . Expanding model variety results in ever higher product and 
process complexity and thus in increasing costs  (Becker 2007, Schneider 2008 ). Due to the fact that the forced introduction 
of alternative powertrain and fuel concepts causes an acceleration of this process, limiting model variety during portfolio d e-
cisions seems to be important in order to realize profit.  
1435
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
Car manufacturers’ options
 Reduction of fuel consumption of conventional 
technologies
 Supply of smaller vehicles
 Development and introduction of alternative powertrain
and fuel technologies
 Combination of the measures
Legislature
Objective: Reduction
of CO2 Emissions
Manufacturer
Objective: Rate of return, market share, sales
Requirement: Threshold for CO2 emissions
Customer
Requirement: Range, fuel consumption, …
Incentive: Tax 
reduction for fuel
efficient cars
Objective: Economic
mobility
Basic conditions: Development of the oil price, …  
Figure 3: Car manufacturers’ options 
 
Based on manufacturers’ decisions regarding the described challenges, further questions arise. For example research and 
development budgets have to be allocated and advertising measures have to be implemented, in order to ensure both , the in-
troduction of competitive products as well as awareness of customers (PwC 2007, Schneider 2008 ). To conclude, developing 
product strategies in the automotive sector require s the consideration of many actors with different objectives and decision 
rules, various interdependences and feedback loops between the influencing factors, several delays between cause and effect, 
as well as uncertainties regarding the development of the basic conditions. Hence, the problem is characterized by dynamic 
complexity (Sterman 2000). Due to this circumstance, results desired by the introduction of new passenger cars can fall short 
off expectation. For example business goals and/or regulatory req uirements can be missed, because the offered technologies 
are not accepted by the market, or the required infrastructure is missing. 
3 REQUIREMENTS AND LITERATURE REVIEW 
In order to develop appropriate product strategies,  the automotive market must be seen  as a dynamic interaction between v e-
hicle supply and vehicle demand embedded in changing macro -economic and regulatory conditions. Special regard has to be 
paid to competitor behavior and supply of infrastructure. Several requirements for an appropriate deci sion support concerning 
the introduction of alternativ e powertrain and fuel concepts can be derived from this understanding. Both , an appropriate 
modeling of the socio-economic system of the automotive market, as well as the analysis respectively evaluation of strategy 
options of the car manufacturer must find consideration. This implies the consideration respectively modeling of 
 
• the system elements as well as the individual actors in the market (e.g. different customer groups),  
• quantified decision rules and existing feedbacks of the decisions on different aggregation levels (e. g. disaggregated 
purchase decisions and aggregated decisions about the supply of infrastructure),  
• uncertainties regarding the development of the basic conditions, 
• interdependences between the vehicles and/or powertrain and fuel concepts, 
• the development of different company objectives under uncertainty. 
  
Several models already exists for the analysis of  the market potential respectively the market development of alternati ve 
powertrain and fuel concepts, mostly focusing on public and macro -economic questions. With regard to System Dynamics, 
(Struben and Sterman 2007 ) model the interaction between supply of infrastructure and demand in the automotive market. 
(Bosshardt et al. 2008; Walther et al. 2008) model basic regulatory conditions, in order to examine the effectiveness and eff i-
ciency of regulatory measures . A first approach focusing on the description of manufacturer and consumer behavior, regar d-
ing the introduction of alternative powertrain and fuel concepts is presented by (Wansart, Walther, and Spengler 2008) . Here, 
the impact of different strategy options of a manufacturer on the compliance with regulatory emission requirements and on 
company objectives are analyzed. Due to the fact that adjustment of the range of vehicles  takes place to fit with regulatory 
requirements, reactive manufacturer behavior is presup posed. Active decisions about the arrangement of different product 
portfolios including the consideration of substitution effects (on supply and demand) between powertrain and fuel technol o-
1436
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
gies, as well as between vehicle classes are largely neg lected. Most of the models consider the impact of changing basic m a-
cro-economic conditions lik e increasing crude oil prices. In any case, the models are based on generic model structures r e-
garding the description of diffusion processes, manufacturers’ behavior/reaction to changing market conditions, as well as th e 
installed base and aging chains, which can be found amongst others in (Forrester 1961, Milling 2002, Sterman 2000). Besides 
that (Größler 2007) introduced a System Dynamic Model to analyze price and product strategies.  To conclude, these models 
fulfill several of the derived requirements, bu t there are two major points of criticism. First, consumer behavior is modeled 
homogeneously, due to the fact that System Dynamics takes an aggregated view. Second until now, no portfolio decisions are 
considered, which can also be attributed to the aggreg ation level. Modeling a complete product portfolio is at least very diff i-
cult with System Dynamics. 
 In order to take a disaggregated view and model individual decision rules, as well as a great number and diversity of v e-
hicles, Multiagent Systems respecti vely Agent -based Simulation can be used. Here, the description and analysis of socio -
economic systems is not based on feedback loops, but on the disaggregated interaction between the agents, as well as b e-
tween the agents and their environment  (Rahmandad and Sterman 2008,  Schieritz and Milling 2008) . Different Agent-based 
Simulation models have been introduced, which consider either the introduction of alternative powertrain and fuel technol o-
gies or the analysis of consumer behavior. (Garcia 2007; Stephen and Sullivan 2004;  Sullivan et al. 2005)  use Agent-based 
Simulation to describe the interaction between infrastructure and demand, as well as to model vehicle choice behavior. (Haan 
et al. 2007) introduce an Agent-based model to analyze the impact of differe nt regulatory measures on purchase behavior. In 
order to analyze individual purchase decisions, the model allows both , a distinction between several consumer groups as well 
as the consideration of a detailed vehicle fleet.  Although it would be possible , portfolio decisions of the manufacturer are not 
taken into account in these studies. Fur thermore, main elements as wells as cause and effect chains of the automotive market 
are largely neglected. For this reason and because of the general potential to comple ment each other  (Schieritz and Milling 
2008), an integration of Agent-Based Simulation and System Dynamics seems to be appropriate for the decision support. The 
next section deals with this integration, in order to design the framework for the development of product strategies in the a u-
tomotive sector.  
4 FRAMEWORK 
The framework for the development of product strategies in the automotive sector is designed as follows ( Figure 4): in con-
trast to other analyses regarding the introduction of alternative powertrai n and fuel technologies, the framework focuses on 
the car manufacturer. The product strategy, especially the defined vehicle portfolio of the manufacturer represents the start ing 
point of the analysis (1). Based on the offered vehicle fleet, the interactio n between supply and demand is regarded on a di s-
aggregated level (2). This interaction takes place considering the competitor behavior of different modes of transport and th e 
supply of infrastructure  on an aggregated level . Furthermore, the success and failure of the product strategy is mainly infl u-
enced by basic macro -economic and regulatory conditions, which are also taken into account in the framework, in order to 
define different scenarios (3). The three main modules of the framework are discussed in  depth below.  
 
Product
strategy
 
Figure 4: Framework product strategy in the automotive sector 
1437
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
(1) In order to define the vehicle portfolio regarding the introduction of alternative powertrain  and fuel concepts, vehicles 
are classified on the basis of two characteristics: the class the vehicle belongs to and the powertrain, which is used. For t his 
reason, decisions must be made, which powertrain and fuel concept to offer in which vehicle class (utilized and unutilized 
combinations in Figure 5). Afterwards, the different vehicle characteristics (e. g. range, price, fuel consumption) have to be 
configured for every combination of vehicle class and powertrain. This portfolio decision represents the  strategy option of the 
car manufacturer, which will be defined exogenously as the system input, in order to evaluate different strategy options. 
Since the product portfolio has to match with customer requirements at any given time, decisions must also be taken with re-
gard to the time of introduction respectively end of supply of the different powertrains in the individual vehicle classes. Fu r-
thermore vehicle characteristics have to be adapted over time (modified combinations in Figure 5). This adaption is based on 
the dynamic developments of the automotive market and thus is considered endogenously in the framework.  
 
Zeit
Portfolio t1 Portfolio t2
Unutilized
combination
Utilized
combination
Modified
combination
Characteristic
(e. g. Range)
Vehicle class
Powertrain
Characteristic
(e. g. Range)
Vehicle class
Powertrain
 
Figure 5: Definition of the portfolio 
 
(2) The framework aims at defining the product portfolio in an Agent -based Simulation environment. This way, the defi-
nition of the vehicle fleet can be made accurately in terms of the consideration of a great number and diversity of vehicles.  
Furthermore, the segmentation of the population on the basis of socio -economic factors, which are relevant fo r the purchase 
decision (e. g. gender, income, age), and preferences (e. g. preference for passenger cars with low fuel consumption) becomes 
possible. Thus, purchase decision rules can be modeled individually and the interaction between car supply and demand c an 
be considered on a disaggregated level. In the Agent -based model, the high degree of freedom  to model agents, as well as 
their behavior and environment is used (Gilbert 2008, Jennings and Woolwridge 1998, Klügl 2001). 
The customers are modeled as reactive agents. They take the purchase decision on basis of different information in terms 
of an if -then rule. While the information can change during a simulation run, the predefined decision rules of the different 
population segments remain constant. Thus, th e same agent is able to take different decisions at different points in time. For 
example, although the influence of the factor fuel cost on the purchase decision is kept constant over time, different purcha se 
decision can occur, due to the fact that fuel costs can change during a simulation run. In order to define the decision rules, 
Discrete Choice Theory is used based on Random Utility Theory. It combines basic approaches of the economic consumer 
theory with decision-theoretical aspects of the quantitati ve psychology, in order to model the probability of a purchase dec i-
sion. The probability of choosing a certain passenger car is calculated on basis of utilities of the different vehicles, whic h are 
considered by the customer. In turn, the utility is a weig hted function of the vehicle and customer characteristics. In order to 
take uncertainty into account, a stochastic random variable is used, which comprises unobserved product and customer ch a-
racteristics as well as measurement errors (Bierlaire 1998, Train 2003). The combination of Agent-based Simulation and Dis-
crete Choice Theory allows modeling the purchase decision close to reality, since the vehicle selection takes place individua l-
ly and in consideration of uncertainty (Haan et al. 2007). 
(3) In order t o model the basic market structure accurately, the Agent -Based model is embedded in a System Dynamics 
simulation environment. Thus, the most important system elements and decision rules (besides the individual purchase dec i-
sions), as well as major cause an d effect relations, feedback structures and delays, can be considered on an aggregated level. 
Here, existing m odel structures, which describe  generic relations in the automotive market  are used . For this reason, the 
1438
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
framework aims at implementing a modular system dynamics model, in order to integrate several modules. The generic stru c-
tures include amongst others the adjustment of production capacities and infrastructure on basis of current demand. For e x-
ample adjustment of capacities happens not immediately, due to long-range planning horizon in the automotive industry. This 
delays could lead to an under- respectively over-utilization of production, which possesses again influence on production cost 
and thus on vehicle price and demand. Additionally, the Sys tem Dynamics model allows the evaluation of different strategy 
options considering different scenarios. On the one hand, the definition of different basic macro -economic and regulatory 
conditions becomes possible by the use of exogenous time series (e.  g. crude oil price forecasts) and constants (e.  g. emis-
sions thresholds). On the other hand, several objectives of the car manufacturer (e. g. vehicle sales and market share in dif fer-
ent vehicle classes) can be taken into account. 
Thus, the framework provides  the integration of a continuous and deterministic System Dynamics model with a discrete 
and probabilistic Agent-based model. Furthermore, two different aggregation levels are taken into account, in order to model 
the socio-economic system automotive marke t appropriate for the evaluation. The linkage of the two models takes place by 
the exchange of information. On the one hand, global information of the continuous simulation model (System Dynamics) 
affects individual, discrete decisions in the Agent -based model. For example aggregated production cost information can be 
used to calculate different vehicle prices ( Figure 6). Furthermore, disaggregated decision influencing factors like fuel costs 
can be calculated on basis of global (e.  g. fuel price and kilometers travelled) and detailed (e. g. fuel consumption of a specif-
ic passenger car) information.  On the other hand, accumulated effects of the individual agent decisions again have influence 
on system behavior of the System Dynamics model. For example, the d ecision rule for the supply of infrastructure for a sp e-
cific powertrain can be modeled as a function of the installed base of this powertrain resulting from individual purchase dec i-
sions. This course of action allows the consideration of product independen cies. For example, learning effects in production 
can be implemented in the System Dynamics model on basis of complementary relations, regarding the accumulated sales of 
a specific powertrain in different vehicle classes. Also, it is possible to identify s ubstitution patterns between vehicles by 
changing the range of vehicles, vehicle characteristics, or the basic conditions. 
 
VehiclepopulationVehicleoffering
System Dynamics model
Agent model
Definition of basic conditions 
(e. g. oil price development)
Definition of 
vehicle offering:
Combination of 
vehicle class 
and powertrain
Exchange of vehicle characteristic
(e. g. production costs)
Exchange of decision influencing factor 
(e. g. fuel price)
Exchange of vehicle population
(e. g. number of powertrains)
Analysis of objectives 
(e. g. rate of return)
Modules
Infrastructure
Market demand
Production
…
Action
Characteristics: Income, age
Decision Rule:
Discrete Choice model
Perception
Agent
Action
Characteristics: Income, age
Decision Rule:
Discrete Choice model
Perception
Agent
Action
Characteristics: Income, age
Decision Rule:
Discrete Choice model
Perception
Agent
Action
Characteristics: Income, age
Decision Rule:
Discrete Choice model
Perception
Agent
Price
Power
 
Figure 6: Method integration 
5 EXAMPLE OF METHOD INTEGRATION 
The following example is used to illustrate the integration of Agent -based Simulation and System Dynamics. We assume a 
car manufacturer, who offers vehicles with two different powertrains ( i = ICE: Internal Combustion Engine , EPT: Electric 
Powertrain) in two different vehicle classes (j = Small, Large). The vehicles are descr ibed by two characteristics (k = Price, 
Range). Furthermore, two different population segments respectively agent groups (n= Rich, Poor) are defined, which are dif-
1439
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
ferentiated by the characteristic income. Customers respectively agents of the different segm ents purchase the offered v e-
hicles in the Agent-based Simulation model. On basis of the purchase decisions,  improvements in price and range of a certain 
powertrain are estimated in the System Dynamics model. To this end, the following notation is used: 
 
)(tUijn   utility derived by a consumer of population segment n from choosing vehicle ij at time t 
nkβ   taste of a consumer of population segment n for the vehicle characteristic k 
)(txijk   value of vehicle characteristic k of vehicle ij at time t 
ijnε   random term capturing the uncertainty 
)(tPijn   probability that a consumer of population segment n chooses vehicle ij at time t 
τnD   discrete demand in segment n and period τ 
τijnS   number of sales of vehicle ij in population segment n in period τ 
τiS    number of sales of powertrain i over all vehicle classes and population segments in period τ  
)(tASi
  
accumulated number of sales of powertrain i at time t 
)(tCi
  
cost of powertrain i at time t 
iλ    elasticity of unit costs of powertrain i 
 
With regard to Discrete Choice Theory, the utility derived by a consumer of population segment n from choosing vehicle 
ij at time t is (Ben-Akiva and Bierlaire 2003) 
 
njitxtU
k
ijnijknkijn ,,)()( ∀+⋅=∑ εβ , 
where the deterministic part of the utility is a linear in the parameters function , and ijnε is a random term capturing the uncer-
tainty on basis of a probability distribution function . Thus, the utility derived by a rich consumer from ch oosing a small ve-
hicle with electric powertrain at time t is given by  
 
RichSmallEPTRangeSmallEPTRangeRichiceSmallEPTiceRichRichSmallEPT txtxtU ,,,,,Pr,,Pr,,, )()()( εββ +⋅+⋅= . 
 
Using a Multinomial Logit Model (Ben-Akiva and Bierlaire 2003 , Bierlaire 1998), the probability that a consumer of  
population segment n chooses vehicle ij at time t is  
 
nji
e
etP
i j
tx
tx
ijn
k
ijknk
k
ijknk
,,)( )(
)(
∀=
∑∑
∑ ⋅
∑ ⋅
β
β
. 
 
On basis of the purchase probability, which is calculated continuously, the customers respectively agents in the Agent -based 
Simulation model take their purchase decision at discrete points in time. To this end, a transition from the continuous time t 
to discrete time periods τ takes place. Assuming a given discrete demand τnD  in segment n and period τ, the number of sales 
of vehicle ij in population segment n in period τ is 
 
ττττ ,,,))(,( njitPDfS ijnnijn ∀== . 
 
Thus, the number of sales of powertrain i over all vehicle classes and population segments in period τ is 
 
ττττ ,))(,( itPDfS
j n
ijnni ∀==∑∑ . 
 
1440
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
For example the number of sales of electric powertrains in period τ is 
 
))(,())(,(
))(,()(,(
,arg,,,,,
,arg,,,,,,
ττ
ττ
ττ
τττ
=+=
+=+==
tPDftPDf
tPDftPDfS
RicheLEPTRichRichSmallEPTRich
PooreLEPTPoorPoorSmallEPTPoorEPT
    τ∀ . 
 
On basis of variable τiS , cost reduction and range improvement due to learning effects in production can be implemented 
in the System Dynamics model. To this end, the number of sales of powertrain i has to be accumulated continuously over 
time in the System Dynamics model 
 
iStAS
t
ii ∀= ∫
=τ
τ)( . 
 
Using the experience curve  concept (Montgomery and Day 1985,  Sterman 2000), cost of powertrain i at time t is given 
by 
 
ittAS
tASttCtC
i
i
i
ii ∀





=⋅==
−λ
)(
)()()(
0
0 . 
 
Cost reduction on basis of the experience curve  can be passed into purchase price. In a similar manner, increase in range of a 
certain powertrain  can be calculated. Again, i mprovements in price and range lead to a changed purchase behavior in the 
Agent-based Simulation model. 
6 CONCLUSION 
The introduced framework allows the development of product strategies in the automotive industry with special reg ard to al-
ternative fuel and powertrain technologies. To this end, the framework provides a detailed and appropriate description of the  
socio-economic and dynamic complex system automotive market. This is achieved by the integration of System Dynamics 
and Agent-based Simulation in a modular simulation environment and the use of different aggregation levels. The usage of a 
simulation environment makes the analysis of different strategy options respectively vehicle portfolios possible. Several 
company objectives as well as uncertainties about the development of basic conditions can be considered. This way, reco m-
mendation can be derived regarding the introduction of alternative powertrain and fuel concepts.  
In the next steps the introduced concept is to be mode led and implemented in a simulation environment. Suitable valid a-
tion methods are to be selected and utilized. In order to evaluate the different strategy options, a procedure of strategy fo rmu-
lation and an evaluation procedure for the several objectives ar e to be considered. With regard to the evaluation of the obje c-
tives, recourse to portfolio theory seems promising. For example correlations between sales development of different vehicles  
or powertrains could be used as a risk measure for defined portfolios. 
REFERENCES 
Bass, F.M. 1969. A new product growth for model consumer durables. Management Science 15: 215-227. 
Becker, H. 2007. Auf Crashkurs: Automobilindustrie im globalen Verdrängungswettbewerb. 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer. 
Ben-Akiva, M., M. Bierlaire. 2003. Discrete choice methods with applications to departure time and route choice. In Hand-
book of transportation science, 2nd ed., ed. R. W. Hall, 7-37. Norwell: Kluwer Academic Publishing. 
Bierlaire, M. 1998. Discrete choice models. In Operations research and decision aid methodologies in traffic and transporta-
tion management, ed. M. Labbé et al., 203-227. Berlin: Springer. 
Bosshardt M., S. Ulli-Beer, F. Gassmann, A. Wokaun. 2008. The effect of multi -incentive policies on the competition of dr i-
vetrain technologies. In Proceedings of the 2008 International System Dynamics Conference , ed. B. C. Dangerfield. Al-
bany: System Dynamics Society. 
Devinney T. M.,  D. W. Stewart. 1988. Rethinking the product portfolio: a generalized i nvestment model. In Management 
Science 34: 1080-1095. 
1441
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
European Union. 2007 . Results of the review of the Community Strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and 
light-commercial vehicles  (COM(2007) 19 final ). Available via  <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/ 
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2007:0019:FIN:EN:PDF> [accessed March 22, 2009]. 
European Union. 2008. European Parliament legislative resolution of 17 December 2008 on the proposal for a regulation of 
the European Parliament and of the Council setting emission performance standards for new passenger cars as part of the 
Community's integrated approach to reduce CO2 emissions from ligh t-duty vehicles (COM(2007)0856, C6 -0022/2008, 
2007/0297(COD)). Available via  <http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-
//EP//TEXT+TA+P6-TA-2008-0614+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN&language=EN#top> [accessed March 22, 
2009].  
Flohr, U. 2008 . Audi A2: Zu viel Vorsprung. Avaiable via  <http://www.spiegel.de/ 
auto/aktuell/0,1518,546187,00.html> [accessed March 22, 2009]. 
Forrester, J. W. 1961. Industrial Dynamics. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Garcia, R. 2007. Modeling vehicle choice behavior using agent -based approach. Second Workshop on agent-based models of 
market dynamics and consumer behaviour  2007. Groningen: European Social Simulation Association and University of 
Groningen. Available via <http://www.essa.eu.org/Special%20Interest%20Groups/Second 
WorkshopOnMarketDynamics2007/Garcia.pdf> [accessed March 22, 2009]. 
Gärtner, A. 2005. Study on the Effectiveness of Directive 1999/94/EC  Relating to the Availability of Consumer Information 
on Fuel Economy and CO2  Emissions in Respect of the Marketing of N ew Passenger Cars.  Final Report, ADAC, Mün-
chen. 
Gilbert, N. 2008. Agent-based Models. Los Angeles: Sage Publications. 
Größler, A., T. Löpsinger, M. Stotz, H. Wörner. 2007. Analyzing price and product strategies with a comprehensive system 
dynamics model – A case study from the capital goods industry. In Journal of Business Research 61: 1136-1142. 
Haan, P. de,  M. G. Mueller, A. Peters, A.  Hauser. 2007. Lenkungsabgaben zur Senkung des CO 2-Ausstosses beim 
Neuwagenkauf: Hintergrund, Mechanismen, Prognosen. Schlussbericht, Programm Energiewirtschaftliche Grundlagen, 
Bundesamt für Energie, Bern.  
Jennings, N. R., M. J. Woolwridge. 1998. Agent technology: foundations, applications, and markets. Berlin: Springer. 
Klügl, F. 2001. Multiagentensimulation: Konzepte, Werkzeuge, Anwendungen. München: Addison-Wesley. 
Lane, B. 2005 . Car buyer research report : consumer attitudes to low carbon  and fuel-efficient passenger cars . Final Report, 
Ecolane Transport Consultancy, Bristol.  
Milling, P. M. 2002. Understanding and managing innovation processes. In System Dynamics Review 18: 73-86. 
Montgomery, D. B., G. S. Day. 1985. Experience curves: evidence, empirical issues, and applications. In Strategic marketing 
and management, ed. H. Thomas, D. Gardner, 213-238. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. 
PwC. 2007 . The automotive industry  and climate change : Framework and dynamics of the CO 2 (r)evolution. Final report, 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Stuttgart. 
Rahmandad, H., J. Sterman. 2008. Heterogeneity and network structure in the dynamics of diffusion: comparing agent -based 
and differential equation models. In Management Science 54: 998-1014. 
Schieritz, N., P. M.  Milling 2008. Agents first! Using agent -based simulation to i dentify and quantify m acro Structures. In 
Complex decision making: theory and practice , ed. H. Quadrat-Ullah, J. M.  Spector, P. E. Davidsen, 139-152. Berlin: 
Springer. 
Schneider, A. 2008. Die strategische Planung des Produktportfolios bei Automobilherstellern: Konzeption eines Instruments 
zur Bewertung des Cycle-Plans. Baden-Baden: Nomos. 
Sterman, J. 2000. Business dynamics: systems thinking and modeling for a complex world. Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill. 
Stephen, C., J. L. Sullivan. 2004. An agent-based hydrogen vehicle/infrastructure m odel. In Proceedings of the Congress on 
Evolutionary Computation 2004, Vol. 2,1774-1779.  Piscataway: IEEE Service Center. 
Struben, J. R., J. Sterman. 2007. Transition Challenges for Alternative Fuel Vehicle and  Transportation Systems. MIT Sloan 
Research Paper No. 4587 -06. Available via  
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=881800> [accessed March 22, 2009]. 
Sullivan J. L., C. Stephen, B. Goodman, M. Everson. 2005. Market penetration of more sustainable vehicles: the HEC case. 
In Proceedings of the Agent 2005 Conference on Generative Social Processes, Models, and Mechanisms , ed. C. M. 
Macal, M. J. North, D. Sallach, 295-306. Chicago: Argonne National Laboratory and the University of Chicago. 
Train, K. E. 2003. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Train, K. E., C. Winston. 2007. Vehicle choice behavior and the declining market share of  US automakers. In  International 
Economic Review 48: 1469-1496. 
1442
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Kieckhäfer, Walther, Axmann and Spengler 
 
Walther, G., G. Meyer, T. S. Spengler, J. Wansart.  2008. Regulatory impact assessment for the transportation s ector – case 
study Germany. In Proceedings of the 2008 International System Dynamics Conference , ed. B. C. Dangerfield.  Albany: 
System Dynamics Society. 
Wansart J., G. Walther, T. S. Spengler. 2008. Limiting motor vehicles’ CO2 emissions – a manufacturer’s challenge In Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 International System Dynamics Conference , ed. B. C. Dangerfield. Albany: System D ynamics So-
ciety. 
 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
KARSTEN KIECKHÄFER is research and teaching assistant  at the Institute of Automotive Management and Industrial 
Production (AIP). His main fields of research are modeling and simulation of dynamic systems, and model -/simulation-based 
product strategy development in the automotive industry. His email is <k.kieckhaefer@tu-bs.de>. 
 
GRIT WALTHER is postdoctoral research fellow at the  Institute of Automotive Management and Industrial Production 
(AIP) at Technische Universtität Braunschweig. Her main fields of research interests are sustainable supply chain manag e-
ment, eco -efficient production and logistics, and modeling and simulation of sustain able systems.  Her email is  
<g.walther@tu-bs.de>. 
 
JOACHIM AXMANN is head of the department Process Development at the Volkswagen AG and applied professor at the 
Technische Universtität Braunschweig. His main fields of research interests are evolution, system and neuro bionics as well 
as modeling, simulation and optimization of t echnical and economical systems . His email address is <j.axmann@tu-
bs.de>. 
 
THOMAS S. SPENGLER is full professor at the Institute  of Automotive Management and Industrial Production (AIP) at 
Technische Universtität Braunschweig.  His main fields of research are production planning and control, modeling and simu-
lation of production systems, material flow management, and (closed -loop) supply-chain management. He is vice president of 
the Technische Universtität Braunschweig  for research and young scientists and board member of the Automotive Research 
Centre Niedersachsen. His email address is <t.spengler@tu-bs.de>. 
1443
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:56:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
