Intelligent agent-assisted adaptive order simulation system in the artiﬁcial
stock market q
Binge Cui a,⇑, Huaiqing Wang b, Kang Ye c, Jiaqi Yan d
a College of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, Shandong, China
b South University of Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
c Shanghai Stock Exchange, Shanghai, China
d Department of Information Systems, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
article info
Keywords:
Intelligent agent
Stock simulation
Short selling
Trading strategy
abstract
Agent-based computational economics (ACE) has received increased attention and importance over
recent years. Some researchers have attempted to develop an agent-based model of the stock market
to investigate the behavior of investors and provide decision support for innovation of trading mecha-
nisms. However, challenges remain regarding the design and implementation of such a model, due to
the complexity of investors, ﬁnancial information, policies, and so on. This paper will describe a novel
architecture to model the stock market by utilizing stock agent, ﬁnance agent and investor agent. Each
type of investor agent has a different investment strategy and learning method. A prototype system
for supporting stock market simulation and evolution is also presented to demonstrate the practicality
and feasibility of the proposed intelligent agent-based artiﬁcial stock market system architecture.
/C2112012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The ﬁnancial turmoil triggered by the US subprime mortgage cri-
sis has swept the world since 2007. Many banks, real estate invest-
ment trusts (REIT) and hedge funds have suffered signiﬁcant losses
as a result of mortgage payment defaults or mortgage asset devalu-
ation. Some even collapsed, such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Broth-
ers (Sorkin, 2008; White & Anderson, 2008 ). Jan Hatzius estimates
that in the past year, ﬁnancial institutions around the world have al-
ready written down $408 billion worth of assets and raised $367 bil-
lion worth of capital ( Hilsenrath, Ng, & Paletta, 2008 ). The crisis has
severely shaken people’s faith in traditional economic theory. ‘‘We
have had a massive failure of the dominant economic model’’, Eric
Weinstein said. In 2009, Nature journal published two articles on
agent-based modeling to study the economics and prevent the
ﬁnancial crisis ( Buchanan, 2009; Farmer & Foley, 2009 ). Agent-
based computational economics (ACE) is the computational study
of economies modeled as evolving systems of autonomous interact-
ing agents (Wu, 2001). ACE is a bottom-up culture dish approach to
the study of economic systems ( Tesfatsion, 2011 ). It has been
applied to research areas such as asset pricing, stock market
simulation, industry dynamics, and macroeconomics.
China’s economy has developed rapidly in the past 30 years. The
healthy development of the stock market is very important for the
national economy. However, changes in the stock trading mecha-
nism may have a greater impact on the market. Thus, the Shanghai
Stock Exchange launched China’s ﬁrst innovation R&D and experi-
mental platform based on ﬁnance simulation and modeling technol-
ogy in 2011. The short-term goal of the innovation experimental
platform is to construct a table-top exercises environment for busi-
ness innovation research. The long-term goal is to build an open and
professional R&D experimental environment that can provide sup-
port and service for continuous trading mechanism innovation. To
achieve this goal, we need to build an innovation experimental plat-
form by designing an adaptive simulation system based on intelli-
gent agents. In practice, some researchers have already developed
agent-based simulation systems of the stock market in past years
(LeBaron, 2002; Nadeau, 2009; Wang, Wang, Xu, Wan, & Vogel,
2004). However, there are still two limitations in today’s practical
simulation systems that need to be addressed. These are:
(1) The simulation of market news in the investment
decision-making process. In general, investors make invest-
ment decisions through comprehensive analysis of various
information in which the ﬁnancial magazine is an important
information source. However, little work has been done
about the utilization of such information in the decision pro-
cess of fundamentals investors. Thus, how to simulate the
decision-making process of fundamentals investors based
on ﬁnancial information is one major challenge.
0957-4174/$ - see front matter /C2112012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2012.02.018
q This research is supported by foundation for outstanding young scientist in
Shandong province (No. BS2009DX011).
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +86 13969680498.
E-mail address: cuibinge@yahoo.com.cn (B. Cui).
Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Expert Systems with Applications
journal homepage: www.else vier.com/locate/eswa

(2) The learning mechanism of fundamentals investors. In the
long practice of investing, each investor will continue to
learn to improve their proﬁtability. Investors improve and
optimize their strategies based on investment return. Every-
one is willing to believe information sources that have
strong predictive power. Thus, the predictive ability evalua-
tion of the various information sources is a key problem.
How to design and implement the learning mechanism of
fundamentals investors is another challenge.
To address these challenges, we studied the conceptual model
of the stock market in-depth. It includes stocks, investors, ﬁnancial
information, trading mechanisms and other participants. We use a
different agent to represent each type of participant. The relation-
ships among the agents are embodied using the agent hierarchy.
We describe in detail the design of the stock agent, investor and
ﬁnancial agent, which shows how market news is used in the deci-
sion-making process. We study the investment strategy and learn-
ing algorithm of fundamentals investors and other types of
investors. Finally, we design and implement one system to simu-
late the real stock market, i.e., Intelligent Agent-assisted Order
Simulation System (IAOSS), and evaluate the reasonableness of
the system design through some technical indicators.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses
related work. Section 3 describes the system design, including the
conceptual model, agent hierarchy, agent design, and system archi-
tecture. Section 4 describes system implementation, including
agent implementation and the investor learning algorithm. Section
5 describes the application and evaluation of the system and con-
ducts short selling experiments. Finally, we draw conclusions to
end this paper.
2. Background and related work
The research of stock market simulation originated from the
ﬁrst artiﬁcial stock market established by the Santa Fe Institute.
Many researchers have subsequently undertaken very effective
work. These efforts are concentrated in several areas: agent-based
stock market model, investor trading strategies, market trading
mechanisms, etc. The related work is reviewed below.
2.1. Intelligent agent and artiﬁcial stock market
Intelligent agents can be seen as software agents with intelli-
gent behavior, that is, they are a combination of software agents
and intelligent systems. Intelligent agents have been successfully
applied to many domains, such as decision support systems ( Wang,
1997), e-Learning ( Xu, Wang, & Wang, 2005 ), supply chain man-
agement ( Wang, Liu, & Wang, 2008 ), and personnel ﬁnance ( Gao,
Wang, Wang, Shen, & Yeung, 2005 ).
The artiﬁcial stock market originated from Holland’s complex
adaptive system ( Holland, 1992), which posited that a ﬁnance sys-
tem is also a complex adaptive system. Various researches have
been conducted into applying intelligent agent-based technology
to the artiﬁcial stock market. For example, the Santa Fe Institute
used intelligent agents to build the ﬁrst artiﬁcial stock market in
the world ( Arthur, Holland, LeBaron, & Palmer, 1997 ), which intro-
duced ‘‘incomplete rationality’’, ‘‘non-linearity’’, ‘‘non-equilib-
rium’’, ‘‘non-effective’’ and enabled the modeling to be closer to
the real market. LeBaron also developed an agent-based model of
the stock market ( LeBaron, 2002 ). In his model, several hundred
agents attempt to proﬁt by buying and selling stock, basing their
decisions on patterns they perceive in past stock movements. Be-
cause the agents can learn from and respond to emerging market
behavior, they often shift their strategies, leading other agents to
change their behavior in turn. As a result, prices do not settle down
into a stable equilibrium, as predicted by standard economic.
In the late 1990s, the NASDAQ stock exchange planned to cease
listing its stock prices as fractions such as 12 1/4 and instead to list
them as decimals ( Buchanan, 2009 ). Before making this risky
change, NASDAQ hired the BiosGroup to develop an agent-based
model of the market to test the idea. The tests revealed that if
the stock exchange reduced its price increment too much, traders
would be able to exploit strategies that would make them quick
proﬁts at the expense of overall market efﬁciency. Thus, when
the exchange went ahead with the changeover in 2001, it was able
to take steps to counter this vulnerability. Such work in designing
and implementing practical stock simulation system is crucial to
our research in the sense that their results provide solid pragmatic
technology. However, not all existing work considers the speciﬁc
effect of ﬁnancial information on investors. In this paper, we design
a ﬁnance agent and investor agent, and proposed the correspond-
ing fundamentals investment strategy.
2.2. Investor trading strategy
In ﬁnance, a trading strategy is a predeﬁned set of rules for mak-
ing trading decisions. An investor uses trading strategy to assist in
making wiser investment decisions and eliminating the emotional
aspect of trading. Generally, the trading strategy styles include
technical analysis, fundamentals analysis, quantitative trading,
trend following, mean reversion, and more. Chen proposed trading
strategy based on genetic programming design ( Chen, 2001). Yang
proposed trading strategy in an artiﬁcial double auction stock mar-
ket with neural learning agents ( Yang, 2002 ). Zhu et al. proposed
strategic learning in a sealed-bid bargaining mechanism by particle
swarm optimization algorithm ( Zhu, Wang, & Yu, 2006 ). Lu and Li
proposed the mixed tactics-based dynamic offering algorithm ( Lu
& Li, 2006 ). Most existing work concerns technical analysis strat-
egy. However, less work has been done in fundamentals analysis
strategy and other strategies. In this paper, we not only consider
the trading strategies of fundamentals investors, but also take into
account the trading strategies of noise investors and momentum
investors.
2.3. Stock market trading mechanism
China’s stock market is still an emerging market. Many trading
mechanism are not the same as those of other countries. There is
much controversy in academia and industry about whether China
should adopt international practices or not. Short selling is a typi-
cal example. In ﬁnance, short selling is the practice of selling secu-
rities that have been borrowed from a third party with the
intention of buying identical securities back at a later date to re-
turn to the lender. It is a form of reverse trading. Mathematically,
it is equivalent to buying a ‘‘negative’’ amount of the assets.
One view about short selling is that allowing short selling af-
fects the stability of the stock market and increases market volatil-
ity ( Allen & Gale, 1991 ). Allen and Gale found that in the case of
restricted short selling, the market is perfectly competitive and
balanced. However, in allowing unrestricted short selling, the mar-
ket is not perfectly competitive and permitting short selling will
therefore affect economic stability. Bemardo and Welch studied
the relationship between ﬁnance crisis fears and crisis ( Bernardo
& Welch, 2004 ). They believe that once investors have concerns
about liquidity, they will tend to immediately sell the stock on
hand to prevent them being the last people to stay in the market.
To limit short selling helps prevent public panic caused by a small
group of investors, thereby reducing the incidence of ﬁnancial cri-
sis and stabilizing ﬁnancial markets.
B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898 8891

The second view is that allowing short selling will not exacer-
bate the volatility of the stock market, but rather will help to sta-
bilize the stock market. Charoenrook and Daouk used panel
regression analysis and event study to examine the impact of short
selling constraints on the volatility of overall market earnings
based on data from 111 countries from December 1969 to Decem-
ber 2002 ( Charoenrook & Daouk, 2005 ). Empirical results show
that the overall market volatility of the countries allowing short
selling is smaller than that in countries banning short selling. Cai
et al. used event study to analyze the Hong Kong stock market
(Cai, Li, & Xia, 2006 ) and found no evidence to show that allowing
short selling increases stock price volatility. On the contrary, short
selling may reduce stock price volatility.
The third view is that allowing short selling or relaxing short
selling constraints has uncertain impact on the stability of the mar-
ket. Kraus and Rubin set up a theoretical model which illustrates
the impact of relaxing short selling restrictions on the volatility
of stock price gains ( Kraus & Rubin, 2003 ). Their model indicates
that the volatility of stock prices may increase or reduce depending
on the value of model information parameters and economic exog-
enous variables.
3. IAOSS architecture design
This section describes the design of the IAOSS system. First, we
investigate the conceptual model of the stock market, which de-
scribes the participants in the stock market and their interaction.
Based on the conceptual model, we propose the agent hierarchy,
which shows the classiﬁcation and inheritance relationship among
different agents. The design of subject agents is then introduced,
including investor agent, stock agent and ﬁnance agent. Finally,
we describe the design of the IAOSS running architecture.
3.1. Conceptual model of the stock market
The conceptual model of our artiﬁcial stock market is shown in
Fig. 1. As can be seen, the participants in the stock market include
stock, investor, trading mechanism, buy and sell orders, ﬁnancial
information, and so on. According to classical ﬁnancial theory, if
there is no market trading, the stock price depends only on the
stock fundamentals, as shown in the top dashed line of Fig. 1 .I n
other words, the stock price strictly depends on a listed company’s
future cash ﬂow discount. However, the stock price will depend on
its supply and demand in the stock market. Investors’ buy and sell
orders will determine real-time stock prices through the exchange
orders matching system, as shown on the right side of Fig. 1 .
Investment strategies include fundamentals analysis strategy
and technical analysis strategy. Technical analysis strategy places
orders based on the trading volume and price, and fundamentals
analysis strategy places orders based on the value judgment of
the listed companies. Generally speaking, investors interpret the
value of the listed companies primarily through ﬁnancial informa-
tion, including various types of ﬁnancial news, listed company
announcements, stock research reports, etc. However, judgment
of the future value of listed companies carries great uncertainty.
As shown in Fig. 1 , each piece of ﬁnancial information reporting
stock fundamentals may have a ‘‘report error’’; similarly, each
investor interpreting the ﬁnancial information will have an ‘‘inter-
pret error’’.
Moreover, investors’ learning and evolution is the key to inves-
tor behavior simulation. Investors evaluate their investment strat-
egies based on historical trading income, which enables them to
gain more investment experience. Speciﬁcally, investors constantly
learn from two aspects, i.e., technical analysis, fundamentals anal-
ysis, as shown in the other two dashed lines in Fig. 1 . From the
above discussion we can see that the conceptual model basically
achieves the design goals of the adaptive order simulation system.
3.2. Agent hierarchy
The adaptive order simulation system operates by interaction
among different agents. Its hierarchy is shown in Fig. 2 . All agents
can be divided into two categories: Function Agent and Subject
Agent. Function Agent implements a basic business function. Sub-
ject Agent corresponds to an entity in the real world, e.g., stock,
ﬁnancial information, investor, etc.
Function Agent can be seen as a simpliﬁed agent. It is not re-
quired to have all the properties described in Section 2.1. There
are three Function Agents in our system. Match Agent is used to
implement investor orders, matching function for call auction
and continuous auction. Evaluate Agent is used to evaluate the pre-
diction accuracy of each Finance Agent after the stock transaction.
Fig. 1. Stock market conceptual model.
8892 B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898

Adjust Agent is used to adjust the trust value of each Investor
Agent to its concerned Finance Agents.
Subject agent has all the capacities of a normal agent, i.e.,
autonomy, co-operability, reactivity and pro-activity. It is used to
simulate the state and behavior of a real entity. In our system, sub-
ject agent contains investor agent, stock agent and ﬁnance agent.
As the name implies, investor agent represents an investor, stock
agent represents a stock and ﬁnance agent represents a kind of
ﬁnancial information.
Generally, investors can be divided into irrational investors and
rational investors. Irrational investors can be further divided into
noise investors and momentum investors. Noise investors place
their orders randomly regardless of stock fundamentals and price
trends. Momentum investors make buy-and-sell decisions at least
in part on the basis of increases and declines in the trading
momentum for a given stock. Rational investors place their orders
by relying on ﬁnancial information, stock price and trend, trading
volume and other information. Rational investor agent can be fur-
ther divided into fundamentals investor agent, technical investor
agent, noise investor agent and momentum investor agent.
3.3. Subject agents
As described above, there are three types of subject agents in an
IAOSS system: investor agent, stock agent and ﬁnance agent. This
section will provide a more detailed description for each type of
them.
3.3.1. Investor agent
Each investor is represented by a stand-alone agent. An investor
agent has attributes: cash amount, investor type (retail investor,
petty investor, etc.), concerned stock list. Each concerned stock is
an object, which contains a stock agent ID, number of held stock,
buy price, earned money, etc. The investor agent base class has four
sub-classes: fundamentals investor agent, technical investor agent,
noise investor agent and momentum investor agent. Each sub-
agent has special attributes. For example, the fundamentals inves-
tor agent has one attribute: concerned ﬁnance list. The concerned
ﬁnance is also an object, which contains the ﬁnance agent ID, com-
posite score, trust value, etc.
At each step, different types of investors submit orders with dif-
ferent investment strategies. For fundamentals investors, the stock
price change will be predicted using the information provided by
the ﬁnance agent, and then the stock that is expected to fall will
be sold out and the stock that is expected to rise will be bought
in. The cash allocation ratio is decided by the size of the price limit.
For technical investors, the stock price change will be predicted
using technical analysis approaches, such as K line graph. For noise
investors, it will randomly select a few stocks to buy and then ran-
domly select a few stocks to sell. For momentum investors, the
stock history price data will be analyzed. The stock that rose con-
tinually will be bought in and the stock that descended continually
in the past period will be sold.
Many investors prefer the opposite operation to obtain greater
but riskier beneﬁts. To simulate such facts, we deﬁned the reverse
investors. The trading rules for the reverse investor are just exactly
the opposite of those of the regular investor, thus we do not de-
scribe them here. Moreover, it is important to note that investors’
positions should be kept at a reasonable level during the trading
process. For individual investors, the cash accounted for 2/3 of
the held stock market value; for institution investors, the cash ac-
counted for 1/4 of the held stock market value.
3.3.2. Stock agent
Each stock is represented by a stand-alone agent. The attributes
of a stock agent include the total circulation capital, fundamentals
information sequences and stock type. Total circulation capital
determines the current number of stocks that can be traded. The
fundamentals information sequence should be pre-deﬁned to gen-
erate the value sequence of the listed companies. However, the
fundamentals value is very difﬁcult to deﬁne because of a wide
range of factors, e.g., P/E ratio, industry policies, macro policies,
etc. To simplify the system design, we adopted the history data
of fundamentals value for the stock agent. On each day, the macro
policy, industry policy and company information will change a lit-
tle, causing the stock fundamentals value to change. This coincides
with the changes of the actual stock market.
3.3.3. Finance agent
Each kind of ﬁnancial information is represented by a stand-
alone agent. The ﬁnance agent receives the fundamentals value
change of all stocks and makes stock ﬂuctuation predictions
accordingly. In an actual stock market, each ﬁnancial analyst
would be bullish on some stocks and bearish on other stocks. Thus,
we add a preference attribute for the ﬁnance agent which has a dif-
ferent value for each stock. We also add an error attribute for the
ﬁnance agent. Assume that the fundamentals value of a stock agent
is BasicV and the report error is ReportEr, then the fundamentals
Fig. 2. Agent hierarchy for adaptive order simulation system.
B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898 8893

value generated from the ﬁnance agent ReportV = BasicV + Repor-
tEr. ReportEr is a Gaussian distribution with mean value equal to
the preference attribute and standard deviation equal to the error
attribute. According to current stock prices, the ﬁnance agent can
compute and output the predicted ﬂuctuation of each stock for
the next day.
3.4. Running architecture for IAOSS
The system running architecture of IAOSS is shown in Fig. 3 .
There are two kinds of users in the system, administrator and ana-
lysts. Administrator can set the system parameters through the
console and start the simulation process. Analysts can view
the market information such as stock price trend, trading volume,
ﬁve order tape, stock transaction records, or investor holding
stocks, through the user interface. All trading orders, transaction
and other data are stored in a TimesTen database. The solid line
in Fig. 4 denotes the data ﬂow and the dashed line denotes the
internal execution order among the agents in the orders simulation
system. The circle denotes the subject agents and the rectangle de-
notes the function agents as described in Section 3.2. These agents
are invoked sequentially and endlessly to simulate the running of
the real stock market.
4. IAOSS implementation
This section describes the implementation of IAOSS based on
our architecture framework discussed earlier. The contents include
investment strategies and learning algorithms. Due to space limita-
tion, we only described one kind of investment strategy of techni-
cal analysis investors and the learning mechanism of fundamentals
analysis investors.
4.1. Investment strategy implementation
The concrete implementation of each kind of agent is complex
and diverse. To save space, we focus on only one kind of investor
agent, the Technical Investor Agent. Even for technical investors,
there are multiple technical analysis strategies based on the stock
trading price and trading volume history, such as K line chart, mov-
ing average, etc. The moving average approach is relatively simple,
thus we will introduce it in detail.
The moving average rule can be divided into the simple average
rule and complex average rule. The computation of a real time
average contains the current stock price. For example, the real time
average value of a 5-day average is the average of the current price
and the closing price of the former four trading days.
Fig. 3. System running architecture for IAOSS.
Fig. 4. Comparison of artiﬁcial market and real market volatility.
8894 B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898

The simple moving average rule can be described as follows:
(1) Buy when the price is above average.
(2) Sell when the price is below average.
Suppose that an investor is tracking a 5-day average. We deﬁne
the current price as P, and the 5-day average value as MA5, and the
trading algorithm can be deﬁned as follows:
IF (P > MA5) THEN Buy;
ELSE Sell;
Complex moving average rule can be described as follows:
(1) Buy when the rising short-term moving average goes
through the rising long-term moving average from down-
top, i.e., Golden Cross.
(2) Sell when the falling short-term moving average goes
through the falling long-term moving average from top-
down, i.e., Dead Cross.
Short-term moving averages include 5-day average, 10-day
average and 30-day average. Long-term moving averages include
60-day average, 120-day average, 250-day average and 500- day
average. Thus, a simple moving average contains 7 combinations,
and a complex moving average contains 12 combinations.
Suppose that an investor is tracking a 5-day average and 60-day
average. We deﬁne the current 5-day average value as MA5, the
60-day average value as MA60, the 5-day average value at the clos-
ing time of the previous trading day as PMA5, and the 60-day aver-
age value at the closing time of the previous trading day as PMA60.
The trading algorithm for the 5–60-day combination can be de-
ﬁned as follows:
IF (MA5 > PMA5 AND MA60 > PMA60 AND MA5 > MA60 AND
PMA5 < PMA60)
THEN Buy;
ELSE IF (MA5 < PMA5 AND MA60 < PMA60 AND MA5 < MA60
AND PMA5 > PMA60)
THEN Sell;
4.2. Investor learning and evolution
The investors’ learning algorithm is one of the most important
factors in determining the intelligence and simulation degree of
the investor agent. There are many algorithms for technical analy-
sis strategies, including Genetic Algorithm (GA), Neural Network
(NN), and others. However, little work has been done on other
investment strategies. In this paper, we investigate the learning
algorithms for fundamentals.
Assume that there are n Learning Fundamentals Investor Agents.
Due to the limitation of knowledge and time, no investor can concern
themselves with all the stocks and ﬁnancial information. Generally,
each investor agent will have a concerned stock pool, and buy/sell
stocks in that stock pool. We deﬁne the concerned stock pool for
investor agent i as {Stocki1,S t o c ki2, ... ,S t o c kip}. Similarly, we deﬁne
the concerned ﬁnance pool for investor agent i as {Financei1,F i n a n -
cei2, ... ,F i n a n c eiq}. In each day of the simulation process, the ﬁnance
agent f will generate a predicted ﬂuctuation for each stock agent s:
FPfs. Moreover, investor agent i stores a trust value for each concerned
ﬁnance agent f:T r u s tif. The trust value is between 0 and 1. If trust = 0,
then investor agent does not trust the ﬁnance agent at all. If trust = 1,
then investor agent trusts the ﬁnance agent completely.
In the initialization phase, we assume that the investor agent i
trusts all concerned ﬁnance agents completely, i.e.,
Trustif ðt ¼ 0Þ¼ 11 6 i 6 n; 1 6 f 6 q: ð1Þ
At tick 1, the predicted ﬂuctuation of the stock agent s for investor
agent i (denoted as IP is) can be computed by the sum of all con-
cerned ﬁnance agent predicted ﬂuctuation multiplied by their
weights (trust value). Formally:
IPisðt ¼ 1Þ¼
Xq
f ¼1
FPfsðt ¼ 1Þ/C3 Trustif ðt ¼ 0Þ 1 6 i 6 n; 1 6 s 6 p: ð2Þ
According to the predicted ﬂuctuation of the stock price, investor
agent i can sort all the concerned stocks into descending order, and
make investment decisions based on the sort result. If investor agent
i only wants to invest one stock and the predicted ﬂuctuation of the
top-ranked stock is positive, it will naturally spend all the available
capital to buy the top-ranked stock. If investor agenti would like to in-
vest in multiple stocks to diversify the risk, it can select a few top-
ranked stocks with a positive predicted ﬂuctuation to invest in and
distribute its capital according to the size of the predicted ﬂuctuation.
After the orders matching transaction, investor agent i com-
putes the actual ﬂuctuation (AC) of the concerned stocks, evaluates
the prediction accuracy of each ﬁnance agent in the last tick, and
then adjusts their trust value. The prediction accuracy is deﬁned
as the overall prediction error (PE) of the ﬁnance agent. Formally:
PEf ðt ¼ 1Þ¼
Xp
s¼1
jACs /C0 FPfsðt ¼ 1Þj 1 6 f 6 q: ð3Þ
The concerned ﬁnance agents should be re-sorted into descending
order based on their prediction accuracy.
The trust value of investor agent i can be adjusted as follows:
increase the trust value of the top ﬁve ﬁnance agent by 5%, 4%,
3%, 2%, 1% respectively; decrease the trust value of the bottom ﬁve
ﬁnance agents by 5%, 4%, 3%, 2%, 1% respectively. Formally:
Adjustif ðt ¼ uÞ¼ 0:01 /C3ð 5 /C0 rankðf Þþ 1Þ rankðf Þ 6 5
/C0 0:01 /C3ð 5 /C0 rankðf Þ/C0 qÞ rankðf Þ > q /C0 5
/C26
1 6 i 6 n; 1 6 f 6 q:
ð4Þ
The function rank denotes the position of the ﬁnance agent f in the
above sorted result. This method is very simple because prediction
error in different periods has the same effect on the trust value. In
practice, we can deﬁne an attenuation factor to modify the time fac-
tor, and the trust value will be adjusted as follows:
Trustif ðt ¼ uÞ¼ 1 þ
Xu
j¼1
Adjustif ðt ¼ jÞ/C3 e/C0 aðu/C0 1Þ
1 6 i 6 n; 1 6 f 6 q: ð5Þ
Here, a is the attenuation factor. We can assign an appropriate value
for it, e.g., 0.1. After adjustment of the trust value, the investor agent
learning is completed at tick u. Step by step, the investor agent will
achieve the fundamentals learning process successfully.
5. IAOSS application
This section describes the application of IAOSS in the real stock
market environment. Our primary purpose is to test the simula-
tor’s results. If the simulation result is good, we will use it as an
experimental platform for trading mechanisms innovation. Here,
we select short selling as the demonstration application after ﬁrst
introducing the artiﬁcial stock market scenario.
5.1. Artiﬁcial stock market scenario
We take the top 50 stocks of the Shanghai Stock Exchange as
our study objects. Assume that there are 20 kinds of ﬁnancial
information. In order to simulate the real market operation, the
B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898 8895

total number of investors, investor distribution, initial market val-
ues distribution, and investors’ cash distribution are taken from the
real market statistical data. The number of investors is approxi-
mately 2 million. Some of the major conﬁguration parameters are
shown in Table 1 .
At the beginning of each trading day, there are ten minutes for
investors to concentrate on placing orders. After the call auction,
inverters can place orders at any time during normal trading hours.
Due to the limitation of computing power and time constraint, we
can only simulate the order process approximately. Our strategy is
as follows: at the ﬁrst step in a day, 5% investors will participate in
the call auction; at each following step that denotes 1 min, 3 ‰
investors will participate in the continuous auction. The Match
Agent will compute the price that enables the largest number of or-
ders to be executed at each step. The simulation process is auto-
matically driven by the system clock.
To be able to compare the simulation results with the real mar-
ket, we tried to use the real market signal. However, direct collec-
tion of stock fundamentals information is very difﬁcult. To simplify
system design and implementation, we used the market funda-
mentals and industry fundamentals history data as the major fun-
damentals information source, and used the statistical data of
individual stocks fundamentals as the secondary fundamentals
information. Because our system used an analog signal rather than
the real fundamental signals, it is meaningless to compare ﬁrst-or-
der volume such as price change. Thus, we select second-order vol-
ume, market volatility, as the indicator.
The market volatility is calculated using the Exponential
Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) approach ( Crowder & Hamil-
ton, 1992 ). The formula is as follows:
r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 /C0 kðÞ
Xn
t¼1
kn/C0 tþ1 rt /C0 /C22rðÞ 2
s
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 /C0 kðÞ kn r1 /C0 r1...nðÞ 2 þ kn/C0 1 r2 /C0 r1...nðÞ 2 þ/C1/C1/C1þ k1 rn /C0 r1...nðÞ 2
hir
; ð6Þ
r is the market volatility. k is the attenuation factor. According to
the well-known risk management institution’s RiskMetric recom-
mendations, we take the value 0.94 for k. r is the logarithmic return
rate, also known as the continuous compounding return rate. /C22r and
r1/C0 n denotes the average return rate. The return rate of the tth day
can be obtained as follows:
rt ¼ lnðPt =Pt/C0 1Þ¼ ln Pt /C0 ln Pt/C0 1 ð7Þ
Pt is the stock price of the tth day.
The entire market volatility is computed through the weighted
average of individual stocks volatility. Here, the weight is the mar-
ket value of each stock, which is calculated through the total stock
lots multiplied by the stock closing price. The formula is as follows:
rMarket ¼
P50
i¼1StockLotsi /C2 ClosingPricei /C2 ri
P50
i¼1StockLotsi /C2 ClosingPricei
: ð8Þ
5.2. IAOSS evaluation and application
In order to verify the effectiveness of the adaptive order simu-
lation system, we have conducted four groups of experiments.
One group is designed to compare the similarity of the artiﬁcial
market and the real market. The other three group experiments
are to analyze and predict the effects of different economic situa-
tions and trading mechanisms on the stock market.
5.2.1. Artiﬁcial stock market evaluation
To evaluate the simulation effect of the artiﬁcial stock market,
we simulated a one-year stock trading process (240 valid trading
days). The experiment result is shown in Fig. 4 .
We use Pearson’s product-moment coefﬁcient to calculate the
similarity between the artiﬁcial market and the real market ( Rod-
gers & Nicewander, 1988 ). The formula is as follows:
qX;Y ¼ corrðX; YÞ¼ covðX; YÞ
rxrY
¼ E ðX /C0 lX ÞðY /C0 lY Þ
/C2/C3
rX rY
ð9Þ
qX,Y is the population correlation coefﬁcient. X is the volatility of the
real market, and Y is the volatility of the artiﬁcial market. lX and lY
is the expected value of X and Y respectively. rX and rY is the stan-
dard deviation of X and Y respectively. E is the expected value oper-
ator, cov means covariance, and corr is a widely used alternative
notation for Pearson’s correlation.
The calculated correlation coefﬁcient is equal to 0.994, which
shows that the artiﬁcial market and real market have very similar
characteristics. Thus, it can serve as the experimental platform of
trading mechanisms innovation. Moreover, the volatility of the
artiﬁcial market is slightly less than that of the real market. This
is because the statistical data is used instead of the real market
signals.
5.2.2. Trading mechanism innovation experiment
We studied the volatility change in different economic condi-
tions (normal, overheating and crisis) and in short selling condi-
tions. Overheating of an economy is generally characterized by
an above-trend rate of economic growth, where growth is occur-
ring at an unsustainable rate. In the case of an overheating econ-
omy, the value of stock will commonly be overvalued. To carry
out this simulation, we increase the stock price limit expectation
by 0.4%. Economic crisis is generally characterized by ﬁnancial
institutions or assets suddenly losing a large part of their value.
In the case of an economic crisis, the value of stock will commonly
be undervalued. To carry out this simulation, we decrease the stock
price limit expectation by 0.4%. The experiment result is shown in
Fig. 5. As can be seen, the different economic conditions have little
impact on market volatility in the current market environment.
How should we study the impact of the short-selling mecha-
nism for China’s securities market volatility? Simulation is a good
choice. In the simulation platform, we can artiﬁcially enlarge the
current trading volume and then examine the impact on China’s
securities market volatility.
The short-selling strategy is designed as follows. In each round,
only 10% of investors will sell short. Investors that can sell short
will be set in advance. The stock lots of each order submitted by
investors allowing short sell will be automatically increased by
50%. After the short period, investors automatically do a reverse
trading repayment of short-selling pre-orders. For example, if an
investor plans to sell X lots in accordance with the original trading
strategy, he or she will sell 1.5 X lots at the same price. Assume that
the short period is 15 days, after 15 days, investors need to
Table 1
Investors distribution statistics.
Investor type Retail Petty Middle Pit Large Institution
Amount of money (¥) 6100,000 100,000–
1000,000
1000,000–
5000,000
5000,000–
10,000,000
10,000,000–
100,000,000
100,000,000–
10,000,000,000
Distribution of account
number
88.1% 10.8% 0.4% 0.2% 0.1% 0.4%
Distribution of market value 17.11% 24.22% 10.22% 4.44% 4.67% 39.33%
8896 B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898

automatically increase a reverse buy order. The order price is up
10% of yesterday’s closing price to ensure buy-back. The experi-
ment result is shown in Fig. 6. As we can see, if short selling is per-
mitted, economic overheating and economic crisis will increase
market volatility remarkably.
The graphs in Fig. 7 represent three economic conditions: normal,
overheating and crisis, from left to right. As we can see, short selling
has great impact on market volatility. On average, market volatility
was increased by 20%. Therefore, whether short selling restrictions
can be liberalized needs careful consideration by the stock exchange.
6. Conclusions
The artiﬁcial stock market is becoming a hot topic in the ﬁnance
domain. It allows us to test the feasibility of the reform with min-
imum cost. The adaptive order simulation system is the core of the
artiﬁcial stock market. This paper has identiﬁed two key issues,
namely, that ﬁnancial information simulation and the learning
mechanism of fundamentals investors are crucial to the artiﬁcial
stock market. We have proposed an intelligent agent-based novel
architecture, IAOSS, which takes advantage of the intelligent,
Fig. 5. The impact of economic condition on the volatility (no short selling).
Fig. 6. The impact of economic condition on the volatility (allow short selling).
Fig. 7. The impact of short selling on the volatility in different economic conditions.
B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898 8897

autonomous aspects of intelligent agent technology. In particular,
the IAOSS architecture has the following novel features:
(1) It introduces ﬁnancial information to the stock market con-
ceptual model. The process of ﬁnancial information acquire-
ment and utilization has been implemented through the
interaction among stock agents, ﬁnance agent and investor
agents. Because the Chinese stock market is dominated by
fundamental investors, the rational and effective use of stock
fundamentals reported in the ﬁnancial information is very
important for stock market simulation.
(2) It introduces the learning mechanism for fundamentals
investors. Fundamental investors can adjust their trust
against different ﬁnance agents based on the earning rate.
Through learning and evolution, fundamental investors can
determine the most appropriate ﬁnance agents. Thus, mar-
ket news can be received by the fundamentals investor
through the ﬁnance agent, and eventually be embodied by
their investment behaviors.
To demonstrate the technical feasibility of the proposed IAOSS
architecture and to serve as an experimental platform for trading
mechanism innovation, a prototype implementation of the IAOSS
framework for the artiﬁcial stock market was constructed. Results
from preliminary prototype evaluations have shown that:
(1) The artiﬁcial stock market has the macro-economic charac-
teristics of the real stock market. Their volatility curves are
very similar; thus, the artiﬁcial stock market can serve as
an innovation experimental platform.
(2) The overheating of the economy and the economic crisis has
little effect on volatility. If short selling is allowed, the effects
will be relatively bigger.
(3) Short selling will have a great impact on volatility in the Chi-
nese stock market. In other words, our experiments support
the ﬁrst view in Section 2.3. It should be noted that as our
experiment scenario is setup based on Chinese stock market
statistics, these conclusions do not necessarily apply to other
countries’ stock markets.
Overall, IAOSS provides the means for policy makers to predict
the consequence of trading mechanisms innovations and take cor-
responding precautions. It will thus have great application value. In
future research, we still have much work to do in certain aspects,
such as investor learning evolution, investor interaction, and inves-
tor psychology.
References
Allen, F., & Gale, D. (1991). Arbitrage, short sales, and ﬁnancial innovation.
Econometrica, 59 (4), 1041–1068.
Arthur, W. B., Holland, J. H., LeBaron, B., & Palmer, R. (1997). Asset pricing and
endogenous expectations in an artiﬁcial stock market . The economy as an evolving
complex system II . Boston: Addison-Wesley, pp. 15–44.
Bernardo, A. E., & Welch, I. (2004). Liquidity and ﬁnancial market runs. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119 (1), 135–158.
Buchanan, M. (2009). Meltdown modeling: Could agent-based computer models
prevent another ﬁnancial crisis. Nature, 460 (8), 680–682.
Cai, J., Li, Y., & Xia, L. (2006). Liquidity, information asymmetry and short sales
constraints: Evidence from the Hong Kong Stock Market . Working paper. <http://
www.papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=979688>.
Charoenrook, A., & Daouk, H. (2005). A study of market-wide short-selling restrictions .
Working Paper. <http://www.dyson.cornell.edu/research/researchpdf/wp/
2009/Cornell_Dyson_wp0921.pdf>.
Chen, S. H. (2001). Fundamental issues in the use of genetic programming in agent-
based computational economics . Working Paper. Taiwan: AI-Econ Research
Center, National Chengchi University. <http://www.aiecon.org/staff/shc/pdf/
ios2001.pdf>.
Crowder, S. V., & Hamilton, M. D. (1992). An EWMA for monitoring a process
standard deviation. Journal of Quality Technology, 24 (1), 12–21.
Farmer, J. D., & Foley, D. (2009). The economy needs agent-based modeling. Nature,
460(8), 685–686.
Gao, S., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Shen, W., & Yeung, S. (2005). Web-service-agents-based
family wealth management system. Expert Systems with Applications, 29 (1),
219–228.
Hilsenrath, J., Ng, S., & Paletta, D. (2008). Worst crisis since ‘1930s, with no end yet
in sight. The Wall Street Journal, 18 (September).
Holland, J. H. (1992). Complex adaptive systems. Daedalus, 121 (1), 17–30.
Kraus, A., & Rubin, A. (2003). The effect of short sale constraint removal on volatility
in the presence of heterogeneous beliefs. International Review of Finance, 4 ,
171–188.
LeBaron, B. (2002). Building the Santa Fe artiﬁcial stock market . Working paper.
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.130.6439&rep= rep1
&type=pdf>.
Lu, P. Y., & Li, Y. J. (2006). Research on mixed tactics-based dynamic offering
algorithm. Journal of Computer Applications, 26 (6), 1456–1458.
Nadeau, K. (2009). Stock market simulation . Project report. <http://www.wpi.edu/
Pubs/E-project/Available/E-project-081109-114657/unrestricted/0908-Final%
5B1%5D.pdf>.
Rodgers, J. L., & Nicewander, W. A. (1988). Thirteen ways to look at the correlation
coefﬁcient. The American Statistician, 42 , 59–66.
Sorkin, A. R. (2008). JP Morgan pays $2 a share for Bear Stearns. The New York Times,
17(March).
Tesfatsion, L. (2011). Agent-based computational economics . Working paper. <http://
www2.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/ace.htm>.
Wang, H. (1997). Intelligent agent-assisted decision support systems: Integration of
knowledge discovery, knowledge analysis, and group decision support. Expert
Systems with Applications, 12 (3), 323–335.
Wang, M., Liu, J., & Wang, H. (2008). On-demand e-supply chain integration: A
multi-agent constraint-based approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 34 (4),
2683–2692.
Wang, M., Wang, H., Xu, D., Wan, K., & Vogel, D. (2004). A web-service agent-based
decision support system for securities exception management. Expert Systems
with Applications, 27 , 439–450.
White, B., & Anderson, J. (2008). Lehman heads toward brink as Barclays ends talks.
The New York Times, 14 (September).
Wu, D. J. (2001). Software agents for knowledge management: Coordination in
multi-agent supply chains and auctions. Expert Systems with Applications, 20 (1),
51–64.
Xu, D., Wang, H., & Wang, M. (2005). A conceptual model of personalized virtual
learning environments. Expert Systems with Applications, 29 (3), 525–534.
Yang, J. (2002). The efﬁciency of an artiﬁcial double auction stock market with neural
learning agents . Evolutionary computation in economics and ﬁnance . Heidelberg:
Physical-Verlag, pp. 85–105.
Zhu, X. B., Wang, X. J., & Yu, Q. (2006). Strategic learning in sealed-bid bargaining
mechanism by particle swarm optimization algorithm. Computer Engineering
and Applications, 42 (32), 185–187.
8898 B. Cui et al. / Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2012) 8890–8898
