1
  
Abstract--In this paper, an agent-based modeling and 
simulation (ABMS) approach is used to model the German 
wholesale electricity market. The spot market prices in the 
European Energy Exchange (EEX) are studied as the wholesale 
market prices. Each participant in the market is modeled as an 
individual rationality-bounded agent whose objective is to 
maximize its own profit. By simulating the market clearing 
process, the interaction among agents is captured. The market 
clearing price formed by agents’ production cost bidding is 
regarded as the reference marginal cost. The gap between the 
marginal cost and the real market price is measured as an 
indicator of possible market power exertion. Various bidding 
strategies such as physical withholding and economic withholding 
can be simulated to represent strategic bidding behaviors of the 
market participants. The preliminary simulation results show 
that some generation companies (G enCos) are in the position of 
exerting market power by strategic bidding. 
 
Index Terms --Agent-based modeling and simulation, EEX 
market, electricity markets, electricity prices, market power. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
HE wholesale electricity prices at the European Energy 
Exchange (EEX) have increased by almost 170% in the 
last seven years, with the average EEX base load spot market 
price increasing from less than 19 Euros/MWh in 2000 to a 
price of 50 Euros/MWh in 2006 [1]. The dramatic increase in 
electricity prices brought serious concerns about market 
operation. Several attempts have been made to investigate the 
soar of electricity prices within Germany. Bower et al. applied 
a model-based simulation approach to investigate the impact 
of industrial consolidation and the corresponding market 
power exertion issue in the German wholesale electricity 
market [2]. The study was done in early 2000, which was 
before the substantial merger of the utilities in 2000 and 2001. 
Thus it does not reflect the current status of the market. 
Müsgens developed a production cost model to derive 
competitive marginal cost estimators, which are compared 
with observed electricity prices [3]. The gap between the 
calculated marginal cost and the market price is interpreted as 
a signal of market power. A nother similar model proposed in 
[4] is used to quantify the significance of fundamental factors 
(like rising fuel cost) and the increasing exercise of market 
                                                           
The submitted manuscript was created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, under 
Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357 with the U.S. Department of Energy. 
All authors are with the Decision and Information Sciences Division, 
Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Avenue, Argonne, IL 60439, USA 
(e-mail: jianhui.wang@anl.gov). 
power on rising prices in the German wholesale electricity 
market. In these two papers, market power was identified 
purely based on the difference between the marginal cost and 
the observed market price. The authors failed to sufficiently 
describe how the market power was exercised, i.e., no 
generating companies’ (GenCos’) bidding behaviors were 
modeled. It has been widely discussed in the literature that 
modeling the bidding behaviors of market participants can 
help capture the exercise of market power and help set up 
corresponding monitoring measures in market design. 
An effective market design should offer correct incentives 
to participants for operations and investment. In the short run 
operations, market power should be monitored and curbed. 
Economic withholding by raising bidding prices and physical 
withholding of generation capacity are two common ways to 
exert market power if a policy is not properly established. For 
example, in some cases of physical withholding exercised 
during the California electricity crisis [5], certain GenCos 
withheld their capacities from the energy market and 
scheduled the capacities into the reserve market or for 
maintenance. Consequently, the energy market was in short 
supply, which led to higher energy prices. From a long-term 
planning point of view, a well-designed market should 
encourage a market-based generation capacity expansion. 
Electricity markets in most parts of the world tend to be 
oligopolistic with strategic interactions among a limited 
number of market players. Hence, traditional models based on 
least-cost dispatch have limited validity when it comes to 
simulating market behavior. Several research approaches have 
been proposed to study market behavior and test different 
market designs. Among these approaches, a game-theory-
based equilibrium model and agent-based modeling and  
simulation (ABMS) are two prevailing tools. In [6]-[8], the 
interactions of market participants are described as a game 
model to study the possible equilibrium existing in the market. 
Classical game theory models such as Cournot, Bertrand, and 
supply function equilibrium (SFE) are employed and differ 
from each other in terms of bid format. However, game-
theory-based models often demonstrate the difficulty of 
modeling the practical market in sufficient detail. A simplistic 
assumption of the price demand function is usually made to 
derive the equilibrium price. Moreover, the absence of the 
dynamic learning nature of market participants in the game 
models can also lead to inaccuracy in the general conclusions.  
In comparison, an advantage of the ABMS approach is that 
it allows for a more realistic representation of the electricity 
Market Power Analysis in the EEX Electricity 
Market: An Agent-Based Simulation Approach 
Jianhui Wang, Member, IEEE, Audun Botterud, Member, IEEE, Guenter Conzelmann, and Vladimir S. 
Koritarov, Member, IEEE 
T
©2008 IEEE.Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

2
market. Since the objective of ABMS is not necessarily to find 
an equilibrium solution, one can relax many of the simplifying 
assumptions underlying game theoretical models. One 
important application of ABMS in electricity markets is to 
analyze potential exercise of market power among generation 
companies. Measuring market power in electricity markets is 
a complex task. Traditional market power indicators such as 
the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) have limited validity, 
since they do not capture the impact of transmission and 
operational constraints in the power system, the relatively low 
price elasticity of electricity demand, and the complex set of 
rules that govern today’s electricity markets. By simulating 
different scenarios of agent behaviors in the electricity 
market, from competitive production cost bidding to different 
types of strategic bidding, ABMS can contribute to identifying 
and measuring the extent of market power exercise in a 
system. The adaptive interactions of players are captured by 
representing each market participant as an agent with its own 
strategy. By using ABMS, not only can the conclusion derived 
from the simulation better approach reality in the long term, 
but agents’ transitory behaviors in the shorter term can be 
observed, which is particularly important to understand since 
most electricity markets are not yet mature. 
In this paper, ABMS is used to model the EEX wholesale 
electricity market. Each generation company is modeled as an 
individual agent, which can apply a number of different 
bidding strategies to its generating units in order to maximize 
profit. The strategic interaction among agents is captured by 
simulating the daily bidding and market clearing process over 
time. A system operator agent clears the market and calculates 
the market prices. GenCos’ profits and consumer costs are 
calculated for each hour based on the market clearing prices 
and aggregated over the simulation period. The simulated 
market clearing prices formed by agents’ production cost 
bidding are regarded as a benchmark for a competitive 
electricity market. The gap between the marginal cost and the 
real market price is considered  as an indicator of possible 
market power exertion. Various bidding strategies such as 
physical withholding and economic withholding are utilized to 
simulate potential strategic bidding behaviors of the GenCo 
agents.  
It should be noticed that this  work is a pr eliminary study 
due to data availability constraints. Direct analysis of the 
behavior of individual generators requires detailed data not 
available in the public domain, although key elements would 
be available to system operators [9]. Hence, the potential 
market power indentified in this paper needs to be justified 
later with more detailed available data before final 
conclusions can be drawn. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
discusses the liberalized German electricity market. Section 3 
introduces the agent-based modeling of electricity markets 
and presents the electricity market complex adaptive system 
(EMCAS) model. Section 4 shows the market representation 
in EMCAS and the modeling structure. Case studies are 
discussed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the discussion. 
II.  THE LIBERALIZED GERMAN MARKET 
According to the Union for the Co-ordination of 
Transmission of Electricity (UCTE) memo 2006 [10], the 
German electricity market is the largest in Europe in terms of 
installed capacity and consumption. The total installed 
generation capacity amounted to 124,300 MW and the entire 
consumption was 559.1 TWh in 2006. The generation 
technology mix consisted of 4% hydropower, 27% nuclear, 
61% conventional thermal, and 8% of other sources.  
As shown by Müsgens [3], the previous eight major 
integrated generation companies in Germany have merged to 
four during the years 2000 and 2001. RWE and VEW merged 
but kept the name RWE. Preussen Elektra and Bayernwerk 
merged to form E.ON. Vattenfall, HEW, VEAG, and 
BEWAG merged to Vattenfall Europe. In addition, French 
EdF bought a major stake of the south-western EnBW. While 
all remaining big players are vertically integrated, they are 
legally unbundled. The capacity share of the largest four 
companies increased from 42% of total German generation 
capacity before these mergers to 61%. 
The EEX was formed by the merger between LPX Leipzig 
Power Exchange and the Frankfurt-based European Energy 
Exchange in 2002 and is the most important energy exchange 
in continental Europe today [11]. In 2006, 89 TWh of 
electricity was traded in the EEX spot market, which accounts 
for about 20% of the whole German power consumption. The 
rest of consumption is traded either over the counter or bound 
by long-term contracts. So EEX spot market prices are used in 
this study as the reference electricity wholesale prices in 
Germany.  
III.  AGENT-BASED MODELING OF THE GERMAN WHOLESALE 
ELECTRICITY MARKET 
In this paper, generation companies are modeled as GenCo 
agents whose objective is to maximize their own profit. Each 
agent is allowed to send its bid into the market to sell electric 
power in the form of price and quantity pairs. By maximizing 
the social welfare, the hourly market clearing price can be 
calculated based on the agents bids. The resulting prices can 
be compared with historical market prices. 
A.  ABMS in the Electricity Markets 
An ABMS system comprises agents that interact and adapt 
on the basis of their individual strategies and objectives. The 
agent-based modeling process demonstrates two basic 
characteristics for each agent in a real-world electricity 
market: 
• Each agent is  interactive . The agents will exert a 
certain influence on the opponents’ strategies by the 
selection of their own strategies. On the other hand, 
the agents themselves will be influenced by other 
agents’ strategies.  
• Each agent is adaptive. The agent is adaptive to its 
own bids and other agents’ bids in the evolutionary 
bidding process. It can learn over time and adjust its 
bidding strategies on the basis of historical and 
published information. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

3
 
In general, to model the agents, two agent rules based on 
the theory of individuals’ decisions can be applied: 
• Rational choice: Individuals decide which action is the 
best for them to take. 
• Bounded rationality: Individuals’ reasoning is partially 
rational. Agents’ decisions are progressively refined by 
means of procedures with limited knowledge and 
abilities [12]. 
 
ABMS has been used to conduct studies on market design 
issues in the England and Wales electricity market. Bower and 
Bunn [13] used ABMS to analyze whether uniform price or 
the discriminatory auction is better for market auction design 
in England and Wales with the introduction of the new 
electricity trading arrangements (NETA). Generation 
companies are modeled as autonomous adaptive agents that 
develop their own bidding strategies by using a reinforcement 
learning algorithm. Bunn and Oliveira [14] developed a 
detailed multi-agent simulation model for the NETA market. 
The bidding behaviors of GenCos and demand companies 
(DemCos) in the bilateral market and real-time balancing 
markets are simulated as a repeated game using a constant 
daily load pattern. Bagnall and Smith [15] also used a multi-
agent model to analyze the UK electricity market. In their 
model, adaptive agents use hierarchical learning classifier 
systems to bid into the electricity market. The effect of 
alternative payment mechanisms on the agent behavior is 
analyzed. ABMS has also been used in a number of more 
theoretical studies on simple hypothetical electricity markets.  
B.  Electricity Market Complex Adaptive Systems (EMCAS) 
The EMCAS model has been developed at Argonne 
National Laboratory over the last 5-6 years. EMCAS models 
the interactions among all major agents in a restructured 
electricity market. The model includes a detailed 
representation of bids, dispatch, and settlement in both day-
ahead and real-time (balancing) electricity markets [16]-[17]. 
The modeling framework can be described in terms of three 
main components: agents, interaction layers, and planning 
periods [18]. 
Different agents, including GenCos, transmission 
companies, distribution companies, DemCos, consumers, the 
system operator, and the regulator, are represented in the 
model. Through an evolving simulation process, some agents 
can learn and adapt their behaviors on the basis of updated 
information.  
The ABMS modeling system provides the ability to capture 
and investigate the complex interactions between the physical 
infrastructures and the economic behavior of market 
participants. The interaction layers provide the environment in 
which the agents operate. This environment, as illustrated in 
Fig. 1, is typically multidimensional; that is, agents operate 
within several interconnected layers, including a physical 
layer, several business layers, and a regulatory layer [18]. 
The planning horizons in EMCAS range from hours in the 
short term to decades in the long term. In this paper, we use 
the short-term market simulation. EMCAS can perform a 
detailed hourly simulation of short-term bidding and market 
operation, including: 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Interaction layers of EMCAS. 
 
• Chronological simulation of day-ahead (DA) and real-
time (RT) market clearing using Direct-Current 
Optimal Power Flow (DC OPF); 
• Modeling agents’ bidding strategies, including 
marginal production cost and physical and economic 
withholding; 
• Rule-based heuristic learning for GenCo agents; 
• Price-based unit commitment; 
• Long-term financial contract and take-or-pay fuel 
contract modeling; 
• Short-term and long-term hydropower (run-of-river, 
storage, pumped storage) optimization; 
• Hourly simulation of wind generation and other 
nondispatchable generation technologies such as 
biomass, solar, etc.; 
• Planned outages and random forced outages for 
generation units; 
• Market design testing, e.g., Locational Marginal Price 
(LMP) vs. system marginal price (SMP) and level of 
price cap. 
 
EMCAS has been used for a number of different purposes. 
For instance, in [19] the model was used to study potential 
exercise of market power in the future electricity market in 
the U.S. state of Illinois. A preliminary analysis of CO 2 
allowance costs, strategic bidding, and demand response in 
the Central European electricity market was reported in [20]. 
IV.  EEX MARKET REPRESENTATION IN EMCAS 
In this paper, the EEX market is modeled with generation 
companies, demand companies, and a market operator. In the 
market, generation companies send their bids into the market 
in the form of generation blocks and prices for each block, 
while demand companies provide their hourly load, which is 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

4
assumed to be inelastic. The market operator clears the 
market based on the GenCos’ bids and the load. The market 
price is decided by the marginal bid to supply the next MW 
load at the equilibrium point where generation is equal to 
load. In the case of strategic bidding, the simulated market 
price may deviate from the real marginal cost due to changes 
in the supply curve. 
 
Major assumptions for the EEX study include: 
• The main focus of the study is on Germany and 
Austria, which make up the EEX market. 
• Generation is therefore aggregated in all countries 
except Germany and Austria. 
• France is modeled as a net importing node to Germany 
based on data from UCTE. 
• A maximum of four pairs of bid generation blocks and 
prices are used for each generating unit. 
• Bids of generating units are composed of production 
cost, emission cost, and markups. 
• Random forced outages for generation units are 
included. 
• Wind generation in Germany is modeled using a 
random time series. 
• Hourly loads are deterministic and inelastic. 
Thirteen countries in Central Europe are modeled in 
EMCAS, as shown in Fig.2: Germany and Austria (DE+AT), 
Poland (PL),Czech Republic (CZ), Slovakia (SK), Hungary 
(HU), Netherlands (NL), France (FR), Switzerland and Italy 
(CH+IT), Southeast Europe and Romania (SETSO+RO), and 
Ukraine (UA), among which Switzerland and Italy (CH+IT), 
Netherlands (NL), and Southeast Europe and Romania 
(SETSO+RO) are represented as importing nodes. Ukraine 
(UA) is represented as a transmission node without load and 
generation. Because EEX covers Germany and Austria, both 
countries are aggregated as one node. 
 
 
Fig. 2.  EEX market representation in EMCAS. 
 
A total of 34 GenCos with 151 thermal units, 5 hydro units, 
and 1 wind unit are modeled aggregately. GenCos with small 
capacities are aggregated as local utility companies by 
technology. The GenCos’ names are represented by letters, 
since this is a preliminary study. The total generation capacity 
is 134,160 MW. The fuel types include nuclear, hard coal, 
lignite, oil, natural gas, hydro, and wind. Hourly market 
clearing is executed based on the DC-OPF algorithm with a 
social welfare objective. The market price in EEX is 
calculated as the locational price at the Germany and Austria 
node. 
Hourly load series are from the online data published by 
UCTE. Transmission line capacity data are from European 
Transmission System Operators (ETSO) [21] and Deloitte 
[22]. Generation capacity and ownership and emission 
allowance prices are from EEX [11]. Heat rates of generators, 
startup cost and time, fuel prices and heating values, generator 
forced outage rates (FOR), etc., are estimated based on a 
variety of other sources [23-24]. 
We assume that GenCos bid into the day-ahead market 
once a day, and that rejected bids in the DA market will be 
available for real-time operations. Bids by GenCos consist of 
a specified number of bidding blocks and corresponding 
bidding prices. A number of different GenCo bidding 
strategies can be simulated. Three of the available strategies 
are explained as follows: 
A.  Production Cost Bidding 
Under the production cost strategy, GenCos act as in a 
perfectly competitive market. Specified by the heat rate curve 
and fuel costs, GenCos’ bids are calculated as average 
incremental production costs for each block of a generating 
unit. It is also possible to scale up the marginal production 
cost bids to include fixed operation and maintenance (O&M) 
costs and emission costs in the bids. 
The European Union has introduced a system for trading 
greenhouse gas (GHG) allowances called the European Union 
Greenhouse Gas Emission Trading Scheme (EUETS). Under 
EUETS, a quota of emission allowances has been assigned to 
each member country based on the respective GHG emission 
targets in the Kyoto treaty. An emission trading market has 
been established in which GHG allowances can be traded 
between participants with surpluses or deficits of allowances. 
Each country allocates its allowances to different national 
sectors and companies based on a national allocation plan. In 
most EU countries, the allowances have been grandfathered; 
that is, the authorities have given them away for free based on 
historical emission levels and the national Kyoto target. 
However, use of GHG allowances still has an opportunity cost 
for the owner, since the allowances can be traded if not used. 
Hence, a reasonable assumption from a GenCo’s perspective 
is to add the cost of the GHG emission allowances to the other 
operating costs. In EMCAS, the cost of GHG emission 
allowances (or a fraction of the cost) can be added to the 
individual bidding blocks for generating units based on heat 
rates and emission factors. The price of the GHG emission 
allowances is an exogenous input to the model. We include 
the full cost of GHG allowances in GenCo bids in the base 
case below. 
B.  Physical Withholding Based on System Reserve (PWSR) 
In some markets at certain times, GenCos can try to 
increase the market price by withholding units during hours 
when the expected system reserve margin is low. In PWSR, a 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

5
system reserve forecast for the next day is made based on 
projections of load and available system capacity. If the 
expected system reserve is below a trigger point, GenCos will 
attempt to reduce it even further with a specified target 
amount. The strategy is only carried out if the target reduction 
in reserves can be reached within this limit. Units can be 
withheld in the least profitable unit order or in the highest bus 
LMP order. In the least profitable unit order, withholding of 
units will start from the least profitable unit until the target 
reduction of reserve margin is met. In the highest bus LMP 
order, the unit located at the bus with the highest LMP will be 
withheld first in order to increase the LMP even further until 
the target reduction of reserve margin is satisfied. 
C.  Fixed Increment Price Probing (FIPP) 
With FIPP, the idea is that GenCos probe their influence on 
market prices by changing bidding strategies, dynamically 
taking into account the outcome of the last day’s dispatch. If a 
bid block in a certain hour was accepted, GenCos w ill 
increase the bid price by a specific percentage for the same 
block in the same hour for the following day. By doing this, 
GenCos hope to be able to raise the market price, assuming 
the bid will be still accepted. In contrast, if the block was not 
dispatched, GenCos will reduce their bids by the same 
percentage, hoping that  it will be dispatched the following 
day. A lower limit can be specified for the bid price, e.g., 
equal to the production cost.  
V.  SIMULATION RESULTS 
Three cases are presented to  simulate GenCos’ bidding 
behavior and their impacts on market prices in the EEX 
market. Case 1 serves as a base case in which GenCos bid 
based on the production cost and emission prices. In case 2, 
FIPP is assigned to GenCos, while PWSR is employed by 
GenCos in case 3. We focus on the month with highest loads 
in 2006, i.e., January, since this is typically the period when 
market power is most likely to occur. Again, due to data 
availability constraints, the results shown in this preliminary 
study need to be justified with more available data. Also the 
model does not account for the pre-existing contracts since 
they are proprietary information. The results presented below 
should be interpreted accordingly. 
A.  Base Case 
In the base case, production cost-based bids are assumed to 
be submitted by each GenCo in the market. In this sense, 
GenCos act as in a perfectly competitive market. 1 The market 
price will be the marg inal production cost to supply the next 
MW load. The simulated merit order curve in the first hour of 
January 1st is shown in Fig. 3. Wind, hydro, and nuclear 
sources have the lowest marginal costs, followed by coal, gas, 
and oil units. It should be noted that the merit curve varies 
between different hours because certain units may be on 
outages randomly. 
                                                           
1 Note that we did not include start-up/shut-down costs and fixed O&M costs 
in the bids. One can argue that GenCos can justify bids above marginal 
production costs in order to recover these operational costs from the market 
clearing price. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Prices (Euro/M
W
h)
Capacity (MW)
Fig. 3.  Merit curve in first hour January 1st 2006. 
 
The simulated price of the system, which could be regarded 
as the marginal cost, and the hourly system loads are depicted 
in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the simulated marginal cost 
shows a synchronous pattern with the load. The simulated 
marginal cost (market price) is between 40$/MWh and 
50$/MWh for most of the time, since coal tend to be the 
marginal production technology. However, the generation 
provided by more expensive units, such as natural gas units, 
drives up the prices in some of the peak load hours.  
 
-5000
5000
15000
25000
35000
45000
55000
65000
75000
85000
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
1 31 61 91 121 151 181 211 241 271 301 331 361 391 421 451 481 511 541 571 601 631 661 691 721
M
W
Prices (Euro/M
W
h)
Hours
Simulated marginal cost Load
 
Fig. 4.  Simulated marginal cost and load in the base case. 
 
The estimated price-cost margins, which are the differences 
between the simulated marginal costs and the observed EEX 
market prices, are shown in Fig. 5. This can be used as a 
measure of market power, since market power often refers to 
situations where the market price is substantially above the 
real production cost level. We can see that the price-cost 
margins are well above zero in peak hours, which indicates 
that some GenCos may not have bid based on their production 
cost. Certain markups may have been added in their bids by 
using bidding strategies to increase the market prices. It can 
be calculated that the price-cost margin on average accounts 
for 26.35% of the market prices. EEX prices are higher than 
the simulated marginal costs 62.9% of the time.  The 
simulated prices are lower than EEX prices in some off-peak 
hours since some GenCos bid lower than their production cost 
in those hours because of the expensive startup costs, load 
Hard coal and lignite 
Wind, hydro and 
nuclear 
Gas and Oil 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

6
requirements in the following hours, minimum unit up and 
down times, and other constraints such as reserve 
requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Simulated marginal cost and price-cost margin. 
 
With the observed price-cost margin, the Residual Supply 
Index (RSI) is used to screen out GenCos that may have the 
capability to greatly influence the market prices. RSI can be 
defined as the difference between the total available capacity 
and a certain company’s available capacity, divided by the 
load. Since the system available capacity and load change 
with time, RSI will also vary in different hours. As defined by 
California Independent System Operator (CAISO), a market 
with RSI lower than 1.1 for more than 5% of the time is 
regarded as uncompetitive [25]. 
The RSI in the base case is shown in Fig. 6. The curve on 
the top shows that other GenCos except GenCo_B, GenCo_C, 
GenCo_I, and GenCo_N have very close RSIs, while these 
four GenCos have significantly lower RSIs comparatively. 
But for all companies, the RSIs are higher than the threshold 
of 1.1 for the entire period.  Based on the guidance of CAISO, 
the figure indicates that there is no single GenCo that has the 
capability to greatly influence market prices in the EEX 
market. However, lower RSIs for these four GenCos suggest 
that these four big companies may deserve further 
investigation to see if they are in a position of manipulating 
market prices. 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1 41 81 121 161 201 241 281 321 361 401 441 481 521 561 601 641 681 721
RSI value
Hour s
GenCo_B GenCo_C
GenCo_I GenCo_N
Other GenCos RSI threshold by CAISO
 
Fig. 6.  Hourly RSIs in the EEX market sorted in descending order. 
 
B.  Physical Withholding Based on System Reserve (PWSR) 
In this case, we simulate the scenario that GenCos apply a 
physical withholding strategy based on the system reserve 
margin, which means GenCos will withhold some units from 
the market to increase market prices by shifting the supply 
curve to the left. The strategy is assumed to be used in the 
least profitable unit order by the four largest GenCos 
(GenCo_B, GenCo_C, GenCo_I, and GenCo_N) with a 
trigger point of 65% and a target reduction of 3% in the 
system reserve margin. Fig. 7 shows the difference between 
simulated market prices in the base case and the PWSR case. 
It can be seen that the prices in the PWSR case are higher in 
most of peak hours than in the base case. This is because the 
relatively low reserve margins in peak load hours trigger the 
implementation of PWSR. The least profitable units, which 
are calculated based on the production cost and market prices, 
are withheld from the market. In comparison, PWSR does not 
come into effect in off-peak hours, since the reserve margins 
during that period are higher than the trigger point. The shift 
in the merit order supply curve due to PWSR at the peak hour 
of 11AM January 17th is illustrated in Fig. 8. The figure 
clearly shows a shift to the left of the curve due to the 
withholding of certain units. The total available capacity 
decreases from 104,206 MW to 103,496 MW. 
 
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1 38 75 112 149 186 223 260 297 334 371 408 445 482 519 556 593 630 667 704 741
P
rices (Euro/M
W
h)
Hours
Base case PWSR
 
Fig. 7.  Simulated market prices in the base case and PWSR case. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Prices(Euro/M
W
h)
Capacity
Base case PWSR
 
Fig. 8. Merit curves in the base case and PWSR case at 11AM January 17th. 
C.  Fixed Increment Price Probing (FIPP) 
In the FIPP case, we first simulate a scenario in which 
GenCos play the same FIPP strategy without explicitly 
cooperation. The percentage for GenCos to adjust their bids 
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
1 41 81 121 161 201 241 281 321 361 401 441 481 521 561 601 641 681 721
P
rice
s (E
u
ro
/M
W
h
)
Hours
Price-cost margin
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

7
on the basis of the accepted/rejected bids in the same hours 
for the previous day is set to be 20%. We assume that FIPP 
will be applied only in peak hours by the four companies since 
their bids have higher possibilities to be accepted when the 
load is high. Fig. 9. shows the simulated market prices in this 
case. Fig. 10 shows the corresponding price duration curves. 
One can observe that the four companies effectively can 
increase market prices by using FIPP collectively. Since the 
market share information is public to the participants in the 
EEX market, these companies with large market shares know 
that their bids for some of th eir units in p eak hours will be 
accepted even if they increase the bidding prices above the 
production cost level. Also in Fig. 10, we can see that the 
simulated prices are still much lower than the EEX prices 
even if the FIPP or PWSR is applied. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1 40 79 118 157 196 235 274313 352391 430469 508547 586625 664 703 742
Prices (Euro/M
W
h)
Hours
Base case FIPP  
Fig. 9.  Simulated market prices in the base case and FIPP case. 
 
Fig. 10.  Price duration curves for historical EEX prices, base case, FIPP case 
and PWSR case. 
 
The FIPP strategy for single GenCos is also simulated in 
order to study the potential exercise of unilateral market 
power. As can be seen in Table 1, the market prices can be 
increased if one single GenCo uses FIPP, but the magnitude 
of increase is much lower than the collective FIPP 
application. This is because all four GenCos bid high in the 
collective FIPP case and a certain GenCo’s bid will therefore 
be accepted due to the huge total market shares of the four 
companies. For the same reason, GenCos can gain positive 
extra profit in the collective FIPP case. In contrast, an 
individual GenCo applying the FIPP case has lower profit 
than in the base case, since it s high bid will be undercut by 
other GenCos’ low bids. The results indicate that the market 
power of a single GenCo is limited, since no single GenCo 
can earn more profit by increasing its bid prices. The single 
GenCo strategy employment is also simulated in the PWSR 
case. The results also show that no single GenCo can be more 
profitable using this strategy, since that GenCo’s generation 
will be less than in the base case due to physical withholding. 
But several GenCos can gain more profit than in the base case 
if they apply the strategy together. 
TABLE. 1.  STATISTICS OF MARKET PRICES  
 EEX 
Price 
Base 
Case 
 
FIPP 
GenCo
_B 
FIPP 
GenCo
_C 
FIPP 
GenCo
_I 
FIPP 
GenCo_ 
N 
FIPP All 
Four 
GenCos 
PWSR All
Four 
GenCos 
Average 65.5 48.3 49.2 51.1 51.2 50.3 56.5 49.85 
Max 699.9 65.6 65. 9 73.5 71.6 68.2 100.0 69.04 
Min 0.6 41.1 41.1 41.1 41.1 41.1 41.1 41.1 
Std. Dev. 40.0 4.8 5.8 7.8 7.9 6.9 14.7 6.8 
% Profit 
Change   –7.3% –7.3% –5.8% –14.4% 14.5% 4.2% 
 
Fig. 11 shows a summary of GenCos’ profit in the base 
case and the collective strategy cases. Not surprisingly, the 
four GenCos are able to obtain higher profit in the strategic 
bidding cases than the base case. It should be noticed that the 
four GenCos can st ill earn higher profit  even though they 
withhold a certain amount of capacity from the market in the 
PWSR case. This is because the much higher prices cancel 
out the negative effect of less capacities bid into the market. 
Another interesting observation is that the strategies by the 
four companies will have different impact on other 
companies’ profit. Most of them will also benefit from these 
four GenCos strategic bidding while some GenCo, like the 
aggregated natural gas-fired local utility company at the very 
right-hand side of Fig. 11, may lose more in the PWSR case in 
comparison to the base case. The reason for this is that natural 
gas units are usually the marginal units in the market when 
dispatched. They cannot cover all their production cost since 
market prices are based on their marginal production cost, 
while their total production cost is calculated from the average 
production cost. The average production cost is usually higher 
than the marginal production cost. In the PWSR case, the 
natural gas units receive more negative profit by generating 
more power, since the capacity of some other units is 
withheld. 
 
 
Fig. 11.  Profit analysis for each GenCo in base, PWSR, and FIPP cases. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

8
VI.  CONCLUSIONS 
The potential market power issue in the EEX market is 
analyzed in this paper. An agent-based simulation and 
modeling approach is applied to model the strategic behaviors 
of individual agents in the markets. A base case in which 
GenCos bid based on their production costs is simulated as a 
benchmark. The noticeable price-cost margin is identified as 
the potential market power in the EEX market.  
Two strategic bidding behaviors for GenCos are employed. 
The preliminary results show that strategic bidding behaviors 
by certain GenCos can effectively increase market prices 
above the production cost level. However, the results indicate 
that no GenCo has the ability to unilaterally increase its own 
profit by applying the FIPP or PWSR strategies. However, 
profits increase substantially when several GenCos bid 
strategically at the same time. Our future work will focus on 
improving the level of detail and validity of the input data. 
Since the study is done with the limited data  reported by 
GenCos in the EEX market, the future improvement in data 
will enhance the accuracy of our conclusions. In addition, we 
will apply other strategies and learning algorithms in the 
simulation, both for the supply and demand sides of the 
market.  
VII.  REFERENCES 
[1] H. -G. Schwarz, C. Lang, and S. Meier, “Market Power in the German 
Wholesale Electricity Market: What are the Political Options?,” in The 
2nd Conference on Energy Economics and Technology, Dresden, 2007. 
[2] J. Bower, D. W. Bunn, and C. Wattendrup, “A Model-Based Analysis of 
Strategic Consolidation in the German Electricity Industry,” Energy 
Policy, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 987-1005, 2001. 
[3] F. Müsgens, “Market Power in the German Wholesale Electricity 
Market,” in Energiewirtschaftliches Institut an der Universität zu Köln 
Working Paper, Nr 04.03, 2004. 
[4] H. -G. Schwarz and C. Lang , “The rise in German wholesale electricity 
prices: fundamental factors, exercise of market power, or both ?,” in 
Institut für Wirtschaftswissenschaft Working Paper , Nr 02-06,  
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 2006. 
[5] J. Bushnell, “California's electricity crisis: a market apart?,” Energy 
Policy, vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 1045-1052, 2004. 
[6] Y. Smeers, “Computable equilibrium models and the restructuring of the 
European electricity and gas markets,” Energy Journal, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 
1-31, 1997. 
[7] B. F. Hobbs, C. Metzler, and J. S. Pang, “Strategic gaming analysis for 
electric power networks: an MPEC Approach,”  IEEE Transactions on 
Power Systems, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 638-645, 2000. 
[8] E. Kahn, “Numerical techniques for analyzing market power in 
Electricity,” Electricity Journal, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 34-43, 1998. 
[9] S. Harvey and W. Hogan. Market Power and Market Simulations. 
[Online]. Available:  http://ks ghome.harvard.edu/~whogan/H-H_Market 
_Power&Simulations_071602.pdf 
[10] Union for the Co-ordination of Transmission of Electricity (UCTE). 
[Online]. Available:  http://www.ucte.org/ 
[11] European Energy Exchange (EEX). [Online]. Available: 
http://www.eex.com/en/ 
[12] R. M. Axelrod and W. D. Hamilton, “The Evolution of Cooperation,” 
Science, vol. 211, no. 4489, pp. 1390-1396, 1981. 
[13] J. Bower and D. W. Bunn, “Experimental analysis of the efficiency of 
uniform-price versus discriminatory auctions in the England and Wales 
electricity market,” Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control , vol. 25, 
pp. 561-591, 2001. 
[14] D. W. Bunn and S. Oliveira, “Agent-Based Simulation: An Application to 
the New Electricity Trading Arrangements of England and Wales,” IEEE 
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 5, pp. 493-503, 2001. 
[15] A. J. Bagnall and G. D. Smith, “A Multiagent Model of the UK Market in 
Electricity Generation,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary 
Computation, vol. 9, pp.522-536, 2005. 
[16] G. Conzelmann, M. North, G. Boyd, V. Koritarov, C. Macal, P. R. 
Thimmapuram, and T. D. Veselka, “Simulating Strategic Market Behavior 
Using an Agent-Based Modeling Approach,” in Proc. of the 6th European 
IAEE Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, 2004. 
[17] G. Conzelmann, G. Boyd, V. Koritarov, and T. D. Veselka, “Multi-Agent 
Power Market Simulation Using EMCAS,” in Proc. of the IEEE PES 
General Meeting, San Francisco, California, 2005. 
[18] V. Koritarov, “Real-World Market Representation with Agents: Modeling 
the Electricity Market as a Complex Adaptive System with an Agent-based 
Approach,” IEEE Power & Energy Magazine , vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 39-46, 
2004. 
[19] R. Cirillo, P. R. Thimmapuram, T. D. Veselka, V. Koritarov, 
G. Conzelmann, C. Macal, G. Boyd, M. North, T. Overbye, and X. Cheng, 
“Evaluating the Potential Impact of Transmission Constraints on the 
Operation of a Competitive Electricity Market in Illinois,” Ar gonne 
National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA, ANL-06/16, 2006. 
[20] A. Botterud, V. Koritarov, and P. R. Thimmapuram, “Multi-Agent 
Simulations of the Electricity Market in Central Europe,” in Proc. 26 th 
USAEE/IAEE North American Conference , Ann Arbor MI, USA, Sept. 
2006.  
[21] European Transmission System Operators. [Online]. Available:  
http://www.etso-net.org/ 
[22] Deloitte Consulting, “Demonstration Script. Strategic regional electricity 
model,” Deloitte Consulting, Prague Czech Republic, 2006. 
[23] Energy Information Administration. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.eia.doe.gov/ 
[24] Statistical Office of the European Communities. [Online]. Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat 
[25] California Independent System Operator, “Predicting Market Power Using 
the Residual Supply Index.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.caiso.com/docs/2002/12/05/2002120508555221628.pdf 
 
VIII.  BIOGRAPHIES 
Jianhui Wang received his B.S. degree in management science and engineering 
and Master’s degree in technical economics and management from North China 
Electric Power University, China, in 2001 and 2004, and his Ph.D. in electrical 
engineering from Illinois Institute of Technology, USA, in 2007. Presently, he is 
a postdoctoral appointee with the Center for Energy, Environmental, and 
Economic Systems Analysis (C EEESA) at Ar gonne National Laboratory. His 
research interests include energy economics and policy, agent-based modeling 
and simulation, electric power systems optimization, and economics. Dr. Wang’s 
papers have appeared in the leading energy economics and engineering journals 
including IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Energy Policy, and Energy. 
 
Audun Botterud received M.Sc. in i ndustrial engineering (1997) and Ph.D. in 
electrical power engineering (2003), both from the Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology. He was previously with SINTEF Energy Research in 
Trondheim, Norway. In 2005, he joined CEEESA. His research interests include 
power system planning and economics, stochastic optimization, decision 
analysis, and agent-based modeling. 
 
Guenter Conzelmann is the Director of CEEESA at Ar gonne National 
Laboratory. Mr. Conzelmann has an environmental engineering degree from the 
University of Bingen in Germany. 
 
Vladimir S. Koritarov joined Argonne National Laboratory in 1991 and is 
presently the Deputy Director of CEEESA. He has 24 years of experience in the 
analysis and modeling of electric and energy systems in domestic and 
international applications. He specializes in the analysis of power system 
capacity expansion options, modeling of hydroelectric and irrigation systems, 
hydro-thermal coordination, reliability and pr oduction cost analysis, marginal 
cost calculations, risk analysis, and electric sector deregulation and privatization 
issues. Before joining Argonne, Vladimir worked as senior power system planner 
in the Union of Yugoslav Electric Power Industry. He is a graduate of the School 
of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 19:04:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
