Multiscale Agent-Based Consumer
Market Modeling
MICHAEL J. NORTH, 1 CHARLES M. MACAL, 1 JAMES ST. AUBIN, 2 PRAKASH THIMMAPURAM, 3
MARK BRAGEN, 2 JUNE HAHN, 4 JAMES KARR, 4 NANCY BRIGHAM, 4 MARK E. LACY, 4 AND DELAINE HAMPTON 4
1Center for Complex Adaptive Agent Systems Simulation; and 2Modeling, Simulation, and Visualization
Group; and 3Center for Energy, Environmental, and Economic Systems Analysis, Argonne National
Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439; and 4The Procter & Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Received June 8, 2009; revised August 19, 2009; accepted September 8, 2009
Consumer markets have been studied in great depth, and many techniques have been used to represent them.
These have included regression-based models, logit models, and theoretical market-level models, such as the
NBD-Dirichlet approach. Although many important contributions and insights have resulted from studies
that relied on these models, there is still a need for a model that could more holistically represent the interde-
pendencies of the decisions made by consumers, retailers, and manufacturers. When the need is for a model
that could be used repeatedly over time to support decisions in an industrial setting, it is particularly critical.
Although some existing methods can, in principle, represent such complex interdependencies, their capabil-
ities might be outstripped if they had to be used for industrial applications, because of the details this type of
modeling requires. However , a complementary method—agent-based modeling—shows promise for addressing
these issues. Agent-based models use business-driven rules for individuals (e.g., individual consumer rules for
buying items, individual retailer rules for stocking items, or individual firm rules for advertizing items) to
determine holistic, system-level outcomes (e.g., to determine if brand X’s market share is increasing). We
applied agent-based modeling to develop a multi-scale consumer market model. We then conducted calibra-
tion, verification, and validation tests of this model. The model was successfully applied by Procter & Gamble
to several challenging business problems. In these situations, it directly influenced managerial decision mak-
ing and produced substantial cost savings. /C2112010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Complexity 15: 37–47, 2010
Key Words: consumer market modeling; multiscale modeling; agent-based modeling
1. INTRODUCTION
E
very day, companies that manufacture consumer
packaged goods (CPG) make decisions that affect the
characteristics of their products as well as their strat-
egies for effectively marketing these products to consum-
ers. Finding answers to common questions, such as how
Corresponding author: Dr . Michael J. North; Center for
Complex Adaptive Agent Systems Simulation, Argonne
National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439;
e-mail: north@anl.gov
Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., Vol. 15, No. 5 COMPLEXITY 3 7
DOI 10.1002/cplx.20304
Published online 9 February 2010 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com)

to increase sales levels or how to adapt to marketplace
changes, requires the companies to consider multiple
issues across time. For example, when a competitor intro-
duces a new marketing campaign, the CPG company, to
craft an appropriate response, must project the campaign’ s
effect over time—both on sales and on the consumers’
view of the marketplace. Modeling these and other time-
based impacts is often difficult because of the complex
sequence of interlocking, nonlinear behaviors that is often
an intrinsic part of large-scale markets. For example, imag-
ine a simple scenario in which one CPG manufacturer
lowers the price of a product to increase sales. Other man-
ufacturers may react with even lower prices to remain
competitive, so that after this price change, the result is
actually a decrease in the original manufacturer’ s sales.
At the same time, manufacturers increasingly find their
decisions interlinked with those of others in the market-
place (e.g., customers, consumers, suppliers). This interde-
pendency reflects the new realities in today’ s markets,
where goals associated with competing for market share
and position now require an equal emphasis on partnering
effectively with suppliers and retailers and on anticipating
and planning for changes in consumer demographics and
desires. Decisions that must be made include how to gain
a short-term tactical advantage as well as how to craft
mid-term and long-term strategies for growth.
Most consumer market models tend to have a
‘ ‘piecemeal’ ’ focus; many focus on a single aspect or sub-
part of the market, such as supply chains for manufac-
turers, point-of-sale data for individual retailers, or panel
data for consumers. A holistic approach is needed to com-
plement these existing piecemeal approaches (e.g., model-
ers should not have to build separate models for every
brand in a category). The ‘ ‘virtual market learning lab’ ’
meets this need.
The virtual market learning lab is the result of a 6-year
partnership between Argonne National Laboratory and
Procter & Gamble (P&G). The goal of this P&G-sponsored
project has been to develop an innovative, computational
agent-based model of consumer markets. The resultant
virtual market learning lab technology represents a new
milestone at the forefront of agent-based modeling of the
consumer market in terms of its extraordinary detail,
broad coverage, and the large number of agents it consid-
ers. Some of the advances achieved in this project have
resulted in a joint Argonne/P&G patent application [1].
The virtual market learning lab has been successfully
applied by P&G to several challenging business problems,
in which its use directly influenced managerial decisions.
This article first briefly surveys the range of techniques
commonly used for modeling consumer markets, then
introduces agent-based modeling and compares and con-
trasts it with traditional approaches. Next the article
describes the virtual market learning lab and discusses
its verification and validation. It concludes with a discus-
sion of the next steps for agent-based consumer market
modeling.
2. RELATED WORK
Although there is an escalating need for models that can
operate at multiple levels of detail to address strategic as
well as tactical issues, the limitations of both current tech-
niques and current data sources in providing robust deci-
sion support systems pose challenges. Leeflang and Wit-
tunk [2] have an excellent review of the history of model
building in support of marketing decisions. This article
considers both traditional and agent-based approaches to
modeling consumer markets.
2.1. Traditional Approaches
Traditional modeling techniques, while powerful, tend to
be limited in the (1) number of factors that they can
incorporate, (2) level of detail on each factor that they can
accommodate, and (3) behavioral complexity that they can
account for. Consequently, they may not be sufficient for
holistically representing interdependent systems, such as
those that commonly underlie the decisions of consumers,
retailers, and manufacturers.
This is not to say there has not been steady progress in
developing data sources and quantitative models—indeed,
there has been. Despite this progress, however, manufac-
turers still find many of the issues raised several decades
earlier by Little [3] to be relevant today, although in a
slightly different form. First, models that can be used over
time to answer short-, mid-, and long-term questions are
hard to find (‘ ‘good models are hard to find’ ’ [3]). Second,
finding models that can adapt to the type of data available
and the granularity decisions require is even harder (‘ ‘good
parameterization is even harder’ ’ [3]). Third, most models
do not incorporate all the players in a system or all the
interactions among those players (‘ ‘most models are
incomplete’ ’ [3]). Finally, managers have not been gaining
insight into the dynamics of their marketplace by using
the models (‘ ‘managers do not understand models’ ’ [3]).
Today’ s managers have a wealth of models available,
ranging from stochastic consumer behavior models, which
excel in providing explanatory power, to empirical models,
which are excellent with regard to providing tactical sup-
port. The plethora of models reflects the speed with which
model developers have capitalized on improvements in
data sources, improvements in computer speed and mem-
ory, and analytic advances.
Managers have come to rely on stochastic behavior
models. These include brand choice models such as the
NBD-Dirichlet approach, purchase incidence models, and
purchase timing models. These models are discussed in
Refs. [4–7]. Although these models are typically embraced
3 8 COMPLEXITY Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

for their descriptive strengths, they have become impor-
tant because they allow managers to understand the
‘ ‘whys’ ’ behind behavior and provide explanatory compo-
nents that can be used to make predictions. Another
strength of these models is their scope: they are often
marketplace representations that encompass the behavior
in an entire category. However, they can be limited in
granularity and thus in the types of decisions they can
readily address. They also have limited capability for han-
dling true market discontinuities.
Econometric models (e.g., regression-based, Monte
Carlo integration [MCI], and multinomial logit [MNL]
models) have made great strides as decision support tools,
in part because of their strong performance in tactical
applications. The statistical analysis of historical data that
these models employ has been shown to adequately pro-
vide support for routine decisions [8]. Typically, separate
models are built to address specific marketing problems
(e.g., there are different models for product, pricing, and
advertizing decisions). This strength, however, can also
become a weakness. If many models and submodels are
created for a single category, users may have to rely on
their own imperfect judgment to bridge the gaps among
disparate model results. Model complexity, real or per-
ceived, becomes a user issue. Another well-known limita-
tion is that the models must rely on only a limited range
of responses: those that are reported on in the historical
data. Finally, there are limits in the ways the models can
handle multiple and possibly simultaneous moves by mul-
tiple competitors across time.
In spite of the impressive growth in both the number
of data sources and the degree of detail, which has yielded
more and better data for econometric modeling and track-
ing, data challenges remain. For example, although exten-
sive records on purchases for panels of consumers exist,
details on the specific contexts behind the purchase data
are often lacking. Researchers might want to know what
the consumer actually saw and considered when choosing
what to purchase.
Spurred by limitations in syndicated data, another area
of growth and development has been the design and mod-
eling of experiments that incorporate more contextual
marketplace components. Experiments with consumers
offer a means of control over various elements, such as
the shelf set and marketing conditions (for multiple
brands and items). This control enables researchers to
more fully explore and model the impact of context; for
example, see Ref. [9]. Furthermore, conditions that are
outside the range of historical data can be set; this ability
is a key issue for managers in many practical situations.
An experimental approach also gives researchers an option
to conduct a deeper analysis at the individual level, which
can be an asset in targeting decisions. However, practical
limitations on the size of the sample and the amount of
contextual detail that can be presented in an experimental
setting restrict the scope of these models.
Some of these challenges have been difficult for tradi-
tional methods to overcome, in part because the decisions
to be made and modeled exist within a contextualized sys-
tem rather than as isolated events. Systems can be both
difficult to model and difficult for managers to internalize.
Even seasoned managers may be more skilled at seeing
immediate causes and effects rather than the whole pic-
ture. The question is, ‘ ‘When should you deal with simple
subsystems, and when should you consider the entire sys-
tem?’ ’ Errors caused by treating systems as a sequence of
problems to be solved one at a time, without recognizing
or taking into account interactions, side effects, or reper-
cussions of decisions, can lead to suboptimal or even cata-
strophic consequences [10].
2.2. Agent-Based Approaches
Agent-based modeling is a relatively new approach for
modeling consumer markets. It is emerging as an exciting
complement to traditional statistical approaches, since it
offers the possibility of using business-driven rules for
individuals (e.g., ‘ ‘I buy brand X because ... ’ ’) to determine
holistic, system-level outcomes (e.g., ‘ ‘Brand X’ s market
share is rising’ ’). As agent-based modeling is a relatively
new technique, and since this article presents an agent-
based model of a consumer market, this section defines
agent-based modeling and compares it with the traditional
techniques discussed in the previous section.
2.2.1. Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation
This section presents a brief overview of agent-based mod-
eling and simulation. More details can be found in Ref.
[11]; here is a short summary:
1. Agents are autonomous decision-making entities or
self-directed objects.
2. Agent-based models are made up of agents and a
framework for agent interactions.
Agent-based modeling allows the behavior of system
components (i.e., the agents) to be used to forecast the
behavior of the overall system. Agent-based modeling is
being used to simulate a wide range of systems. These
include industrial supply chains [11], nascent economies
[12, 13], international political systems [14, 15], possible
future energy infrastructures [16], and complex commod-
ity markets [17].
Although the commonly used traditional techniques for
modeling consumer markets (discussed in the previous
section) are powerful with regard to their purposes, they
are generally not able to provide sufficient levels of detail
with regard to the interdependent behaviors of consumers,
retailers, and manufacturers. Some common interdepen-
Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. COMPLEXITY 3 9
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

dencies include the reactions of consumers to combina-
tions of retailers’ and manufacturers’ behaviors; the reac-
tions of one retailer to other retailers’ behaviors; the reac-
tion of one manufacturer to other manufacturers’ behav-
iors; the reaction of one retailer to the manufacturer’ s
behavior; etc.
As previously mentioned, CPG manufacturing compa-
nies regularly make choices on what characteristics their
products should have and what marketing strategies they
should use. In making these decisions, they typically have
to address many issues to ensure they will increase sales
while adapting to marketplace changes. The example
given—of how to react to a competitor’ s marketing cam-
paign—generally requires the company to project the cam-
paign’ s effects over time both on sales and on the consum-
ers’ view of the marketplace. The analysis of these situa-
tions is often difficult because of the complex sequences
of interlocking, nonlinear 1 behaviors commonly found in
large-scale, competitive CPG markets. (As mentioned, if
one CPG manufacturer lowers its prices to increase sales,
but competitors lower their prices too, the original manu-
facturer’ s sales may actually decrease.)
Some of the traditional methods discussed in the previ-
ous section can represent such interdependencies by using
simplifying assumptions. However, they are still limited to
predicting either (1) only a small number of steps into the
future (because of the high rates of change that could be
caused by the feedback that would take place between
decisions) or (2) long-run averages that ignore the tran-
sient conditions that occur on the way to equilibrium. Fur-
thermore, the level of detail required in order to practically
apply these predictions can sometimes overwhelm the
current capabilities of these traditional methods. The
amount of data needed for an analysis is generally a func-
tion of the number of variables and their combinations
that need to be estimated. In other words, these methods
often require an enormous amount of data in order to be
used. For example, if a company was considering lowering
the price of a product and wanted to gauge the effect this
reduction would have on consumers by using a traditional
method, it would have to obtain data from a long period
of time in the past when prices had previously been low-
ered in order to statistically predict the outcome of the
new scenario.
As stated earlier, traditional techniques tend to be lim-
ited in the (1) number of factors that can be included, (2)
level of detail on each factor that can be accommodated,
and (3) behavioral complexity that can be accounted for in
each analysis. Consequently, they usually neither holisti-
cally represent the detailed interdependencies involved in
the decisions of consumers, retailers, and manufacturers
nor can they address the simultaneous need to computa-
tionally represent the inherently nonlinear behavior (e.g.,
learning and lock-in) found in marketplaces like the CPG
marketplace. Traditional methods are typically not able to
fully account for the fact that each market participant’ s
subsequent decisions are intimately and sensitively de-
pendent on all previous decisions by every market partici-
pant, including itself.
2.2.2. Agent-Based Modeling of CPG Markets
There is currently a small amount of work that applies
agent-based modeling to CPG markets. The work can be
broken up into two overall categories. The first one models
the activity within individual retail stores. The second one
models market-level purchasing trends. Both of these
types of models are considered here.
The first major approach to the agent-based modeling
of consumer markets focuses on consumer activity within
individual retail stores. The main goal is to study store lay-
outs or physical plans to improve store sales through bet-
ter shelf placement of goods. Casti’ s ‘ ‘SimStore’ ’ retail store
simulation is a good example of this type of model [18]:
The starting point for SimStore is a real supermarket
in the Sainsbury chain, one located in the London
region of South Ruislip. The agents are individual shop-
pers who frequent this store. These electronic shoppers
are dropped into the store, and then make their way to
the various locations in the store by rules such as ‘ ‘wher-
ever you are now, go to the location of the nearest item
on your shopping list,’ ’ so as to gather all the items they
want to purchase.
The second major approach focuses on market-level
purchasing trends by simulating the purchasing and usage
choices of many individual consumers. The main goal is
to improve the profitability of certain organizations by
determining how and why consumers select certain prod-
ucts. Models of this type include those developed by
Adjali, Dias, and Hurling [19]; Brannon et al. [20]; and
Schenk, Lo¨ffler, and Rauh [21]. Related papers and articles
covering other or more general types of consumer market
modeling include those by Janssen and Jager [22]; Jager
[23]; Jager, Janssen, and Vlek [24]; Said, Bouron, and Dro-
goul [25, 26]; and Collings et al. [27]. As described later,
the virtual market learning lab is different from these
efforts because of the comprehensiveness of its modeling
1The term ‘ ‘nonlinear’ ’ here means that changes in system
outputs are not directly proportional to changes in system
inputs. For example, consider two simple functions F(x)
and G(x). If F(1) 5 2, F(2) 5 4, F(3) 5 6, and so on, then
F(x) is linear (actually F(x) 5 2x). If G(1) 5 2, G(2) 5 4,
and G(3) 5 1,000,000, then G(x) is nonlinear . Marketplace
relationships that abstractly resemble G(x) are very com-
mon.
4 0 COMPLEXITY Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

and the depth of the verification and validation it has
undergone. The models by Adjali, Dias, and Hurling [19];
Brannon et al. [20]; and Jager, Janssen, and Vlek [24] are
considered in more detail here since they represent a good
spectrum of current work.
Adjali, Dias, and Hurling [19] describe ‘ ‘the architecture
for an agent-based consumer behavior model drawing
from the marketing and the behavioral sciences literature.’ ’
It then shows ‘ ‘some simulation results exploring and com-
paring different consumer behavior models using real,
individual-based market data.’ ’ The Adjali, Dias, and Hurl-
ing model is based on a real map of a city and thus is
more spatially detailed than the virtual market learning
lab model. However, it is also more limited than the virtual
market learning lab in terms of population size, and it
does not model the complex interactions among retail
stores, retail chains, and manufacturers. Thus, it is more
detailed in one respect but less complete overall and less
well validated than the virtual market learning lab.
Brannon et al. [20] discuss a model of the ‘ ‘consumer
apparel purchase decision’ ’ process. The model uses a sub-
stantial set of psychological factors that involves motiva-
tions, preferences, and constraints to represent the meth-
ods used by consumers to choose items of clothing. The
result is a detailed model of consumer choice that is inter-
esting because it attempts to explicitly (rather than implic-
itly, like the virtual market learning lab) account for con-
sumer identity and self image. However, the virtual market
learning lab is a more complete model since it represents
retail store, retail chain, and manufacturer interactions.
The virtual market learning lab has also undergone more
detailed verification and validation.
Jager, Janssen, and Vlek [24] discuss a model of con-
sumer agents that uses a ‘ ‘consumat’ ’ approach. This
approach is described as one that represents consumers
who use a multitheoretical framework, which combines
concepts from several different theoretical viewpoints. In
particular, Jager, Janssen, and Vlek [24] cites ‘ ‘theories
about human needs ... , motivational processes ... , social
comparison theory ... , classical and operant conditioning
theory ... , social learning theory, decision and choice
theory ... , theory of reasoned action ... , theories on rela-
tive deprivation ... , and the theory of normative conduct.’ ’
The Jager, Janssen, and Vlek framework combines these
ideas by using (1) a two level ‘ ‘pressure system’ ’ that mod-
els group and individual forces, (2) a two-part ‘ ‘state sys-
tem’ ’ that represents individual reasoned behavior and
social orientation, (3) an ‘ ‘impact system’ ’ that defines the
consequences of consumer choices, and (4) a policy
‘ ‘response system.’ ’ The result is a rich description of con-
sumer behavior. However, the virtual market learning lab
models—and also the Adjali, Dias, and Hurling model and
Brannon et al. model—are more complete since they rep-
resent retail store, retail chain, and manufacturer interac-
tions. In addition, the virtual market learning lab has
undergone more detailed verification and validation.
3. VIRTUAL MARKET LEARNING LABORATORY
The virtual market learning lab is a large-scale, agent-
based model of consumer markets codeveloped by
Argonne and P&G. It represents the shopping behavior of
consumer households and the business behavior of
retailers and manufacturers in a simulated national con-
sumer market. All of the major participants associated
with one category of products (e.g., laundry detergent) are
simulated during each model run. Figure 1 provides a
high-level overview of the agents and agent relationships
used in the model. Figure 1 itself may seem fairly simple.
However, there is a high level of complexity and feedback
inherent in the agent interactions. This complexity
coupled with the need for detailed results precludes high-
level parametric summarization.
The Figure 1 agents represent the major participants in
CPG markets, such as consumer households, retail stores,
retail regions, retail channels, and manufacturers. The
agent relationships represent interactions, such as supplier
options, competitive responses, and management direc-
tives. This section discusses the virtual market learning
lab’ s design and implementation relative to the major
actors and actions. It then outlines the model’ s usage.
3.1. Virtual Market Learning Lab Structure
The virtual market learning lab is an agent-based con-
sumer market model that has been implemented by using
the Recursive Porous Agent Simulation Toolkit (Repast)
FIGURE 1
Overview of the virtual market learning lab agents and agent
relationships.
Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. COMPLEXITY 4 1
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

toolkit [28]. Repast is a widely used, free and open source,
agent-based modeling and simulation (ABMS) toolkit that
is available directly from the Web at http://repast.source
forge.net [29]. The virtual market learning lab was origi-
nally developed by using Repast for Java [28] and was
more recently upgraded to use Repast Simphony [30].
The virtual market learning lab uses consumer house-
holds to represent CPG purchasers and users. A household
is a group of people who live together and, to some
degree, coordinate their shopping. The virtual market
learning lab’ s households are composed of shoppers,
inventories, and consumers, as shown in Figure 2.
Virtual market learning lab shoppers purchase goods. A
virtual market learning lab household can have any num-
ber of shoppers. Typically, each household has a primary
shopper and possibly a secondary shopper. Shoppers pur-
chase goods from retail stores and then place the goods
into one of their household’ s inventories. Shoppers choose
stores on the basis of their individual store preferences,
which can evolve over time depending on the shopper’ s
experiences in each store. Shoppers select goods on the
basis of consideration sets.
Consideration sets are based on Miller’ s [31] well-
known observation that normally people can remember
and cognitively process at most, ‘ ‘seven plus or minus two
items at one time.’ ’ There are two kinds of shopper consid-
eration sets: an in-store consideration set (ISCS) and an
out-of-store consideration set (OSCS).
An OSCS represents the products, or abstractions of
products, consumers have in mind when they shop. It
contains weighted elements that model abstracted, but
critical, features of store shelf items or stock-keeping units
(SKUs). The critical features contained in each OSCS ele-
ment are determined by the hierarchy of characteristics
for the product category being considered. For example,
each laundry detergent OSCS element contains a brand, a
form (e.g., liquid or powder), and a benefit (e.g., bleach).
The weights are used to account for advertizing exposure,
advertizing decay, product usage experiences, and other
issues or activities outside the retail stores.
An ISCS represents the short list of retail store SKUs
that are candidates for purchase during the current shop-
ping trip. The ISCS contains weighted lists of SKUs. The
list of SKUs is generated by each shopper on each shop-
ping trip, as shown in Figure 3. The generation process
involves applying user-defined filters to match the shop-
per’ s OSCS elements to the SKUs available on the shelf of
the retail store where the shopper is shopping. Filters,
shown in Figure 4, allow model users to specify exactly
how each shopper in a given category selects items from a
store shelf. Filters are user input data that can be changed
as needed by model users. Each shopper’ s filters are
defined by using a filter sequencer and a tree of filter
steps. The filter steps act as qualifiers. If a filter is exe-
cuted successfully, then all of the ‘ ‘child’ ’ filters below it in
the tree are also executed; otherwise, the child filters are
ignored. Each filter step itself offers a highly configurable
matching process that supports many kinds of individual
examinations of and matches among store shelves, the
OSCS, and the ISCS. Filter steps also allow SKUs to be
added to, removed from, and reweighed within the ISCS.
In addition, filter steps can modify the shopper’ s likelihood
of purchasing a product on the current shopping trip. Any
purchases made are stored in the appropriate inventory.
FIGURE 2
Virtual market learning lab consumer household.
FIGURE 3
Virtual market learning lab shopper and store shelf.
4 2 COMPLEXITY Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Household inventories represent the product stock kept
within a given household. Households always have at least
one inventory, but they may have more than one (e.g., an
extra inventory for special stocks, such as snacks for
invited guests). Inventories can be drawn down in several
ways (e.g., sequential or parallel use of all stored items),
depending on the category being modeled. Like shopper
filters, inventory policies are user input data that can be
changed as needed by model users. Inventory levels and
other factors are factored into each shopper’ s purchase
decisions. Multiple shoppers may contribute to each in-
ventory (e.g., primary and secondary shoppers may supply
the main household inventory). Each inventory, in turn,
may act to supply multiple consumers.
Virtual market learning lab household consumers use
the products stored in inventories on the basis of a flexible
set of user-specifiable consumption amount distributions
(e.g., a normal distribution). Virtual market learning lab
household consumers are different than standard market
consumers in the sense that standard market consumers
purchase, store, and use products, while household con-
sumers only use products. The purchasing and storage
activities of standard market consumers are represented
by shoppers and inventories, respectively. Like shopper fil-
ters and inventory policies, consumption behavior is user
input data that can be changed as needed by model users.
Retail stores represent locations for purchasing goods
in the given category. They are associated with stocked
store shelves, advertizing flyers, product displays, tempo-
rary price reductions (sales), optional inventories, and
other features. Retail stores are grouped into neighbor-
hoods. Each neighborhood contains a set of competing
stores, a population of shoppers who visit the stores, and
a representative for each retail channel. As each retail
channel may have a different number of stores (e.g., there
are many more drug stores than club stores in the United
States), individual stores may be in more than one neigh-
borhood. Store membership in multiple neighborhoods
creates the potential for networks of neighborhoods to
form. The constraints for neighborhood formation are
specified by the user within the input data.
Retail neighborhoods are grouped to form retail
regions. Regions are used to reflect varying store stocks,
promotions, features, preferences, etc. on a broad geo-
graphic basis. The number of regions used depends on the
category and area being modeled.
Each retail store belongs to one of several retail chan-
nels. Each retail channel represents either a type of retailer
(e.g., food stores) or a specific retailer. Channel-level data
are used when there is a large number of small retailers
that have similar stores and strategies or when higher-level
results are needed. Data for specific named retailers are
used when there are a small number of large retailers or
when detailed results are needed. Hybrid combinations of
channel-level and named retailers can also be used when
mixtures of results are needed. In all cases, the retailer
channel information is provided as user-defined input
data.
Virtual market learning lab retail channels, regions, and
stores can operate in one of two modes: scripted mode or
rules mode. In scripted mode, stores follow a prespecified
plan for stocking shelves, sales, etc. All channel, regional,
and store behaviors can be activated through scripts.
Scripts are normally specified as detailed input data.
Scripted mode is useful for model calibration, some types
of model verification and validation, simulation warm-up,
and tests of specific situations of interest. In rules mode,
retail channels, regions, and stores react to their current
conditions by using individualized sets of strategies. Their
reactions can be a function of various factors, such as
recent profits, recent sales volumes, or selected targets.
The reactions can include price changes, sales, promo-
tions, or stocking changes at the channel, regional, or store
levels. The virtual market learning lab retail channel,
region, and store can move back and forth between
scripted mode and rules mode during a simulation run as
directed by model users through the input data.
Manufacturers function similarly to retail channels
except that they produce rather than resell products. Like
retail channels, they operate in both scripted and rules
modes and can move between these two modes as
directed by input data. Scripted mode can be used to acti-
vate any manufacturer behavior. Rules mode allows manu-
facturers to respond interactively to their environment and
FIGURE 4
Virtual market learning lab shopper filters.
Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. COMPLEXITY 4 3
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

to change their behavior depending on the results they
experience. Manufacturers have a variety of ways to react
to their environments, including changes in offered SKU
portfolios, advertizing, wholesale pricing, and trade sup-
port.
3.2. Virtual Market Learning Lab Usage
The virtual market learning lab is not intended to predict
the future behaviors of market participants (e.g., the
responses of P&G’ s competitors), and it is not intended to
precisely predict future market outcomes (e.g., next year’ s
market shares). Rather, it is intended to support testing of
the robustness of market strategies and to allow an explo-
ration of the potential drivers for trends. A competitive
advantage can be gained by using the virtual market learn-
ing lab because it helps ensure that strategic decisions are
made with a clear knowledge of the benefits and risks
associated with each option.
As mentioned, the virtual market learning lab is
intended to support robustness testing of market strat-
egies. For example, imagine that a company is hypotheti-
cally considering reducing the price of one of its leading
brands. The virtual market learning lab cannot determine
if a competitor will reduce the price of its brand in
response. However, it can automatically generate a range
of potential response scenarios, each describing a possibil-
ity of what might happen in response to the initial price
cut. If a large number of diverse response scenarios were
executed and all of them were favorable, one might con-
clude that a price reduction would be relatively safe. How-
ever, if many of the runs were moderately unfavorable or a
few runs were extremely unfavorable, one might conclude
that a price reduction would be risky. Again, the virtual
market learning lab would not predict market outcomes. It
would simply allow a diverse range of potential market
outcomes to be explored in an efficient and objective
manner.
In addition to helping users analyze a possible market-
ing strategy, the virtual market learning lab is designed to
help users explore the potential causes of trends. For
example, imagine that there were several competing opin-
ions on why one kind of coupon distribution schedule
tends to increase sales much more than other kinds of
coupon distribution schedules. It might be difficult and
expensive to test these opinions in actual markets. The vir-
tual market learning lab provides an efficient platform for
testing each opinion. To complete the tests, input scenar-
ios and possibly agent software that represented each of
the candidate explanations could be configured and exe-
cuted in the virtual market learning lab, often through
many stochastic replications. The results from the model
runs could then be compared to the observed market
effects. If there were significant mismatches between the
model results and the real market outcomes for a given
opinion, one might conclude that that opinion is probably
not correct, at least for the range covered by the observed
data. The reverse may or may not be true since the model
results might match the real world data for coincidental rea-
sons other than the correctness of the opinion. 2 Of course,
reproducing one market outcome does not guarantee that
the theory is correct. However, this approach turns out to be
powerful in practice. The virtual market learning lab has
been used to demonstrate that several strongly held ideas
about consumer behavior do not successfully reproduce
observed market outcomes. This was accomplished by
showing that each idea’ s predicted system-level consequen-
ces do not obtain from the agent-level hypotheses.
4. MODEL CALIBRATION, VERIFICATION, AND
VALIDATION
For purposes of reference, model calibration, verification,
and validation can be briefly summarized as follows:
1. Calibration fits a model’ s parameters to data from the
real system.
2. Verification checks a model against its specifications.
3. Validation checks a model against observations of the
real system.
For more detailed coverage of these topics, see Refs.
[11, 32].
It is important to emphasize that there is no perfect
model. In the famous words of George Box, ‘ ‘all models are
wrong, but some models are useful.’ ’ With regard to cali-
bration, verification, and validation, this statement means
that for practical purposes, each activity is a function of a
model’ s intended purpose. Thus, practical models can
never be universally correct but instead have the potential
to be calibrated, verified, and validated for a given usage. 3
Thus, a critical issue for model calibration, verification,
and validation is to define clearly the intended usage or
usages of the model.
As previously discussed, the virtual market learning lab
is being developed for the specific purpose of providing a
2This is more generally known as the ‘ ‘model uniqueness
problem,’ ’ which is a philosophical challenge for all types of
modeling.
3Even models from well-understood areas in the physical
sciences and engineering have these limits. Consider the
simple example of a civil engineering model that simulates
the stresses on buildings by using specialized classical
mechanics. Such a model may work well enough to allow
complete buildings to be fully designed in silico. However , it
is almost certainly invalid for simulating extremely small
objects, since it lacks quantum mechanics, or very large or
very speedy objects, since it lacks general relativity.
4 4 COMPLEXITY Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

robust strategic planning test bed for brand management
teams. Efforts testing the virtual market learning lab
focused on calibration, verification, and validation for this
usage.
4.1. Major Model Calibratio n, Verification, and
Validation Methods
There are a variety of ways to calibrate, verify, and validate
models. As the virtual market learning lab is a simulation,
this section and later sections emphasize methods that
support simulations. The major methods include design
walkthroughs, code walkthroughs, manual tracing, manual
comparisons, automated unit testing, and automated sys-
tem testing.
Design walkthroughs involve presenting software
designs (e.g., flowcharts) to domain experts or independ-
ent designers (i.e., designers who did not develop the
modules under examination) and then manually stepping
through example executions of the design. They allow do-
main experts and independent designers to confirm or
refute the correct operation of the design. Code walk-
throughs are much like design walkthroughs, except that
they involve presenting software code to domain experts
or independent programmers (i.e., programmers who did
not write the modules under examination) and then man-
ually stepping through example executions of the code. As
with design walkthroughs, they allow the examiners to
evaluate the code.
Manual tracing involves (1) executing a model line by
line in a debugging program and confirming the correct-
ness of the operation of the simulation or (2) logging the
line-by-line execution of a model and then examining the
resulting data in great detail. Manual comparisons involve
logging the end results of model execution and then com-
paring these results to expected values derived from the
model’ s specifications or against observed data from the
real system.
Automated unit tests allow individual modules of soft-
ware to be automatically executed independent of the rest
of the model. As a result, the actual programmed behavior
of software components can be checked against the
behavior expected on the basis of the component’ s specifi-
cations or observed data from the real system. Similar to
automated unit tests, automated system tests allow full
programs to be automatically executed and checked
against target data. Thus actual programmed behavior of
complete programs can be checked against the behavior
expected on the basis of the software’ s specifications or
observed data from the real system.
4.2. Virtual Market Lea rning Lab Calibration,
Verification, and Validation
Because of the virtual market learning lab’ s potential stra-
tegic influence, there is an extremely strong need for cali-
bration, verification, and validation. In fact, all major
releases of the model normally undergo an extensive and
well-documented calibration, verification, and validation
process that is made up of more than 60 steps. This pro-
cess has three major phases: model development verifica-
tion, model development calibration and validation, and
model pilot study validation. Each of these activities is
outlined in the sections that follow.
4.3. Testing Phase 1, Model Development Verification
In the verification phase, a model is checked against its
specifications. The virtual market learning lab verification
process involves the use of design and code walkthroughs,
manual tracing and comparisons, and automated unit and
system testing. In particular, major model releases are sub-
jected to about 30 well-documented verification checks.
The exact details of the verification checks are docu-
mented in the virtual market learning lab integrated test-
ing plan (ITP) spreadsheet. The content of this spread-
sheet is discussed in sections 4.1 to 4.5.
4.4. Testing Phase 2, Model Development Calibration,
and Validation
In the calibration stage, a model’ s parameters are fitted to
data from the real system, while in the validation phase,
the model is checked against observations of the real sys-
tem. In particular, major model releases are subjected to
about 10 well-documented calibration steps and about 20
well-documented validation checks. Many of the tests are
quantitative. The tests include manual tracing and com-
parisons and automated system testing. Furthermore,
many of the quantitative checks have acceptance thresh-
olds within 1–10%. An example verification check that
compares virtual market learning lab results to the
expected theoretical values is shown in Figure 5. This fig-
ure shows as a percentage on the X-axis the amount of a
product that is used by a consumer normalized by the
amount that was recommended by the manufacturer. One
hundred percent means consumers use exactly the manu-
facturer’ s recommended amount. More than 100% means
consumers use more than the recommended amount. The
Y-axis shows the probability of each normalized usage
level within a given sample population. The R2 fit value
between the 81 virtual market learning lab data points and
the theoretically expected product usage distribution is
0.996. These results show that the model is correctly
reproducing consumer product usage levels.
The data used for calibration and validation include the
following:
c Household panel data that include detailed time-series
purchase histories from hundreds of shoppers covering
multiyear periods. The shoppers’ identities are made
suitably anonymous to avoid privacy issues.
Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. COMPLEXITY 4 5
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

c Scanner data from store checkout counters at a variety
of retail stores. Again, the shopper’ s identities are made
suitably anonymous to avoid privacy issues.
c Aggregate and time-series industry statistics, including
market shares, sales volumes, and advertizing trends.
c Detailed industry data, including information on retail
store shelf stocks, product pricing numbers, and prod-
uct promotion counts.
The virtual market learning lab was calibrated and vali-
dated against two full sets of the above-mentioned data
from independent sources. The sources were the two
major companies that collect retail data: Nielsen and In-
formation Resources Inc. (IRI). The following calibration
and validation work was done:
1. A full set of IRI data for the laundry detergent and den-
tifrice categories were successfully used by Argonne
and by P&G separately for calibration and validation, as
outlined earlier.
2. A full set of Nielsen data for the laundry detergent and
dentifrice categories were successfully used by Argonne
and by P&G separately for calibration and validation, as
outlined earlier.
The exact details of each calibration step and validation
check have been fully documented in a virtual market
learning lab ITP spreadsheet that is delivered with each
major version of the model. The content of this spread-
sheet is discussed in sections 4.1 to 4.4.
4.5. Testing Phase 3, Model Pilot Study Validation
In addition to undergoing the Phase 1 and 2 verification,
calibration, and validation steps discussed above, the vir-
tual market learning lab was tested during pilot applica-
tions for both the laundry detergent and dentifrice catego-
ries. These pilot application tests were conducted by P&G.
The tests included manual tracing and comparisons and
involved the following steps:
1. Virtual market learning lab input data were set up to
reflect realistic scenarios of special interest to the P&G
brand teams.
2. The model’ s ability to reproduce the conditions of inter-
est observed in the real system was demonstrated to
the brand teams.
3. Narratives of possible future scenarios and/or explana-
tions for observed but otherwise unexplained or misun-
derstood market phenomena were provided to the
teams.
When new explanations were provided for observed
market phenomena, they were analyzed by brand team
members and other domain experts. After investigation
the explanations held up to scrutiny. Several have even
been accepted within the virtual market learning lab user
community as being genuinely ‘ ‘new learning’ ’ about the
categories under study.
5. MODEL USE
In addition to being used to obtain new information about
the categories under study, the virtual market learning lab
was successfully applied by P&G to several challenging
business problems. In these situations, it directly influ-
enced managerial decision making and produced substan-
tial cost savings. Furthermore, the model was recently cali-
brated to be used in an additional category.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
As previously discussed, consumer markets have been
studied extensively by means of a wide range of tools.
Although many of these tools have been very successful
with regard to achieving their particular purpose, they have
generally not been able to provide enough detail on the
interdependent behavior of consumers, retailers, and man-
ufacturers. This gap has created a need for holistic models
of consumer markets. As demonstrated by the virtual mar-
ket learning lab, agent-based modeling is an approach that
can be used to successfully create such models.
The next steps for virtual market learning lab develop-
ment include increasing the level of geographic fidelity
and moving to multiple product categories. These steps
can allow the model to represent an even more compre-
hensive view of consumer markets.
FIGURE 5
Verification check comparing virtual market learning lab results to
theoretically expected product usage results (R 2 5 0.996).
4 6 COMPLEXITY Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

REFERENCES
1. Hahn, J.I.; North, M.J. Methods of creating and using a virtual consumer packaged goods marketplace; US Patent and Trade-
mark Office Patent Application Number 20,080,086,364, 2006.
2. Leeflang, P .S.H.; Wittink, D.R. Building models for marketing decisions: Past, present, and future. Int J Res Mark 2000, 17,
105–126.
3. Little, J.D.C. Models and managers: The concept of a decision calculus. Manage Sci 1970, 16, 466–485.
4. Ehrenburg, A.S.C. Repeat Buying Theory and Application. North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1972.
5. Nakanishi, M.; Cooper, L.G. Simplified estimation procedures for MCI models. Mark Sci 1982, 1, 314–322.
6. Guadagni, P .M.; Little, J.D.C. A logit model of brand choice calibrated on scanner data. Mark Sci 1983, 2, 203–238.
7. Chatfield, C.; Ehrenberg, A.S.C.; Goodhardt, G.J. Progress on a simplified model of stationary purchasing behavior. J R Stat
Soc 1966, 129, 317–367.
8. Bucklin, R.E.; Lehmann, D.R.; Little, J.D.C. From decision support to decision automation: A 2020 vision. Mark Lett 1998, 9,
235–246.
9. Rogers, G.; Renken, T . The importance of shelf presentation in choice-based conjoint studies. Proceedings of the Sawtooth
Software Conference, San Diego, CA, Sawtooth Software, Sequim, WA; October 2004; pp 137–144.
10. Dorner, D. The Logic of Failure: Recognizing and Avoiding Error in Complex Situations. Metropolitan Books: New York, 1996.
11. North, M.J.; Macal, C.M. Managing Business Complexity: Discovering Strategic Solutions with Agent-based Modeling and
Simulation. Oxford University Press: Oxford, England, 2007.
12. Padgett, J.F .; Ansell, C.K. Robust action and the rise of the Medici, 1400-1434. Am J Sociol 1993, 98, 1259–1319.
13. Padgett, J.F .; Lee, D.; Collier, N. Economic production as chemistry . Ind Corp Change 2003, 12, 843–877.
14. Cederman, L.-E. Modeling the co-evolution of states and nations. Workshop on Simulation of Social Agents: Architectures
and Institutions, Chicago, Illinois; Sponsored by Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, 1997.
15. Cederman, L.-E. Endogenizing geopolitical boundaries with agent-based modeling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99, 7296–
7303.
16. Stephan, C.; Sullivan, J. Growth of a hydrogen transportation infrastructure. Agent 2004 Conference Proceedings, Conference
on Social Dynamics: Interaction, Reflexivity and Emergence, ANL/DIS-05-6; Co-sponsored by Argonne National Laboratory
and the University of Chicago, October 7–9, 2004.
17. North, M.J.; Thimmapuram, P .R.; Macal, C.; Cirillo, R.; Conzelmann, G.; Koritarov, V .; Veselka, T . EMCAS: An agent-based tool
for modeling electricity markets. Agent 2003: Conference on Challenges in Social Simulation, Argonne National Laboratory,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, October 2–4, 2003.
18. Casti, J. BizSim: The world of business—In a box. Complexity Int 2001, 8, 6.
19. Adjali, I.; Dias, B.; Hurling, R. Agent based modeling of consumer behavior. Abstract in Proceedings of the 2005 North Ameri-
can Association for Computational Social and Organizational Science Annual Conference, University of Notre Dame, Notre
Dame, Indiana, 2005.
20. Brannon, E.; Ulrich, P .; Anderson, L.J.; Presley, A.B.; Thommesen, S. Agent-based simulation of the consumer’ s apparel pur-
chase decision. National T extile Center Report I98-A09-A1, 2000.
21. Schenk, T .A.; Lo¨ffler, G.; Rauh, J. Agent-based simulation of consumer behavior in grocery shopping on a regional level.
J Bus Res 2007, 60, 894–903.
22. Janssen, M.A.; Jager, W . Simulating market dynamics: The interactions of consumer psychology and structure of social net-
works. Artif Life 2003, 9, 343–356.
23. Jager, W . Simulating consumer behaviour: A perspective. In: Environmental Policy and Modeling in Evolutionary Economics;
Faber, A.; Frenken, K.; Idenburg, A.M., Eds.; Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, 2006, Groningen, Netherlands.
pp. 1–27.
24. Jager, W .; Janssen, M.A.; Vlek, C.A.J. Consumats in a commons dilemma: T esting the behavioural rules of simulated consum-
ers. COV Report No. 99-01, Centre for Environment and Traffic Psychology, University of Groningen, 1999.
25. Said, L.B.; Bouron, T .; Drogoul, A. Multi-agent based simulation of consumer behaviour: T owards a new marketing approach.
Proceedings of the International Congress on Modelling and Simulation (MODSIM 2001), Canberra, Australia. December
2001.
26. Said, L.B.; Bouron, T .; Drogoul, A. Agent-based interaction analysis of consumer behavior. Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, Bologna, Italy, 2002.
27. Collings, D.; Reeder, A.A.; Adjali, I.; Crocker, P .; Lyons, M.H. Agent based customer modeling: Individuals who learn from
their environment. Proceedings of the 2000 Congress on Evolutionary Computation, La Jolla, California, 2000.
28. North, M.J.; Collier, N.T .; Vos, J.R. Experiences creating three implementations of the Repast agent modeling toolkit. ACM
Trans Model Comput Simulation 2006, 16, 1–25.
29. ROAD. Repast Organization for Architecture and Development (ROAD). Available at: http://repast.sourceforge.net. Accessed
on 1 June 2009.
30. North, M.J.; Howe, T .R.; Collier, N.T .; Vos, J.R. Repast Simphony runtime system. Proceedings of the Agent 2005 Conference
on Generative Social Processes, Models, and Mechanisms, ANL/DIS-06-5, Argonne National Laboratory, The University of
Chicago. Chicago, IL, October 13–15, 2005.
31. Miller, G.A. The magic number seven plus or minus two. Psychol Rev 1956, 63, 81–97.
32. Law, A.M. Simulation Modeling and Analysis, 4th edn. McGraw-Hill: New York, 2006.
Q 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. COMPLEXITY 4 7
DOI 10.1002/cplx
 10990526, 2010, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.20304 by Dalhousie University, Wiley Online Library on [26/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
