Proceedings of the 2023 Winter Simulation Conference
C. G. Corlu, S. R. Hunter , H. Lam, B. S. Onggo, J. Shortle, and B. Biller , eds.
ONCE BURNED, TWICE SHY? THE EFFECT OF STOCK MARKET BUBBLES ON TRADERS
THAT LEARN BY EXPERIENCE
Haibei Zhu
Svitlana Vyetrenko
Kshama Dwarakanath
Tucker Balch
J.P. Morgan AI Research
383 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10017, USA
Serafin Grundl
Federal Reserve Board
Constitution Avenue NW &, 20th Street NW
Washington, DC 20551, USA
David Byrd
Bowdoin College
233 Main Street
Brunswick, ME 04011, USA
ABSTRACT
We study how experience with asset price bubbles changes the trading strategies of reinforcement learning
(RL) traders and ask whether the change in trading strategies helps to prevent future bubbles. We train the
RL traders in a multi-agent market simulation platform, ABIDES, and compare the strategies of traders
trained with and without bubble experience. We find that RL traders without bubble experience behave like
short-term momentum traders, whereas traders with bubble experience behave like value traders. Therefore,
RL traders without bubble experience amplify bubbles, whereas RL traders with bubble experience tend to
suppress and sometimes prevent them. This finding suggests that learning from experience is a mechanism
for a boom and bust cycle where the experience of a collapsing bubble makes future bubbles less likely
for a period of time until the memory fades and bubbles become more likely to form again.
1 INTRODUCTION
Financial bubbles are a well-known economic phenomenon defined as periods of unsustainable growth or
loss in the price of an asset (Sornette and Cauwels 2014). In a bubble, asset prices deviate from their
intrinsic valuation (Garber 1990). The occurrence of financial bubbles accompanies the increase of trade
in all realms (Frehen et al. 2013). Bubbles are dangerous and can significantly damage the existing
economic system (Ofek and Richardson 2003; Phillips and Yu 2011). While the mechanism of how a
bubble generates and bursts has been well studied (Phillips and Shi 2018), few efforts have focused on how
such bubbles may affect investor trading strategies and how investors can potentially affect the evolution
of existing bubbles. In this work, we investigated how exposure of market agents to bubble scenarios in
a simulated environment affected future trading strategies and bubble formation. We found that market
participants with sufficient bubble experience tend to suppress bubble formation and lessen bubble duration
while maintaining profitability.
979-8-3503-6966-3/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE 291
2023 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC) | 979-8-3503-6966-3/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WSC60868.2023.10408617
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
Our empirical results derive from a financial market multi-agent system (MAS) based on the Agent-Based
Interactive Discrete Event Simulation (ABIDES) environment (Byrd et al. 2019;Vyetrenko et al. 2020 ). By
configuring each agent as an individual market participant, MAS can effectively represent a financial market
(LeBaron 2001). In ABIDES, agents can communicate only via messages routed through the simulation
kernel with appropriate computation and communication delays. Similar to the real world, most of these will
be order-related activity and status messages to or from a stock exchange agent. We populate the simulation
with market participants following various pre-defined trading strategies and configure it to generate market
bubbles. Our experimental agents utilize reinforcement learning (RL) to learn from the experience that they
are exposed to in order to optimize a trading policy that should earn profit and potentially affect market
bubbles. We train RL agents with different quantities of bubble exposure as measured by the percentage
of training scenarios that contain a bubble. We then evaluate these learning-based agents on new bubble
scenarios to investigate their tendency to enhance or reduce bubbles’ formation, size, and duration.
The main contribution of this work is a detailed simulated study of how experiencing stock market
bubbles “trains” the learning market agents to modify their trading strategies from momentum-based to
value-based on the purpose of maximizing their profits – which also results in fewer and smaller bubbles.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 covers motivation and related work. Section 3 describes
the simulation experiment configurations, followed by the experiment results in Section 4 . We discuss the
results in Section 5 and conclude our work with future directions in Section 6 .
2 BACKGROUND
The history of financial bubbles and the mechanism of how such bubbles form and burst have been well
investigated in the literature ( Brunnermeier and Oehmke 2013 ;Bhattacharya and Yu 2008 ). Specifically,
the life cycle of a bubble has been clearly illustrated ( Scherbina and Schlusche 2014 ). A bubble usually
starts with a new expectation of an asset or a random price fluctuation. For instance, in an upward bubble,
buy orders flow in and significantly increase the price because potential payoff attracts investors. Such a
rapid price increase and potential return attract further buy orders. However, fast price inflation is usually
followed by a quick decrease – the burst of a bubble. A bubble can be burst for various reasons, including
regulatory constraints ( Lyócsa et al. 2022 ) and liquidity decrease ( Sornette and Cauwels 2014 ). When
bubbles burst, the equilibrium in the order book breaks, and the sell orders dominate.
The primary focus of this work is the effect of prior bubble experience on trading strategies. Human-
subject experiments introduce variations that can be confounding factors. Our approach relies on a multi-agent
market simulation to better isolate the effect of the bubble experience. Multi-agent systems have been
widely used in financial studies ( Lux and Marchesi 1999 ;Preis et al. 2006 ;Byrd 2019 ). Compared
to human-subject experiments, multi-agent systems can simulate markets with a large scale of market
participants in an infinite time horizon, which cannot be achieved in lab studies. Market participants in
simulations can be assigned to various empirically designed trading strategies. Also, such simulations allow
researchers to control market variables precisely via specified configurations to answer specific research
questions (Balch et al. 2019 ).
This study used ABIDES as the multi-agent platform for simulating the financial market ( Byrd et al.
2019;Amrouni et al. 2021 ). The core of ABIDES is a simulation kernel with a messaging system that allows
agents to communicate with configurable latency and nanosecond resolution in continuous double-auction
trading similar to NASDAQ. Each stock offered in ABIDES is configured with the help of an exogenous
time series that represents the agent’s understanding of the outside world – the “fundamental” price ( Byrd
2019), which is a mean-reverting time series based on the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (O-U) process ( Uhlenbeck
and Ornstein 1930 ).
Some efforts have been made to simulate financial bubbles using multi-agent systems (Duffy and Ünver
2006;Samanidou et al. 2007 ;Westphal and Sornette 2020 ). However, these studies have a limitation in
configuring experimental agents with rule-based trading strategies. Agents follow one or a few strategies
throughout the simulation, and such strategies are not guaranteed to adapt to market changes and obtain
292Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
Figure 1: The start and end of a bubble are identified by comparison of moving averages on the market
price with the “fundamental” value of the asset.
payoffs. Understanding that traders in the real world have more complicated strategies, which monitor
market environment states, including holding positions, volumes, and trends, learning-based agents are
needed to better approximate real-world trading strategies (Kolm and Ritter 2020;Charpentier et al. 2021 ).
3 EXPERIMENT
We designed and conducted the experiments in ABIDES. We first configured an exchange agent to process
all messages – buy or sell orders placed by other agents. Once the exchange agent receives the orders,
it matches them within the order book and executes them. The exchange agent also publishes the order
book’s status and the executed orders’ details so that other agents can observe how the stock price changes
and how the order book evolves. Our study only focused on one stock to simplify the market environment.
Since shocks and external impacts are not considered, we configured a mean-reverting fundamental time
series as the stock’s expected valuation. A market maker is also configured as a special agent, which
provides market liquidity by placing orders on both sides of the order book. Specifically, we configured
four types of rule-based background agents with corresponding strategies:
• Value agents represent professional investors with a better understanding of stock valuation. This
is the only role with access to the fundamental value of a stock. The agent places orders to arbitrage
market prices against the valuation, which is an approximate observation of the fundamental value
– buying if the stock is undervalued and selling if it is overvalued.
• Noise agents represent retail investors who place a few orders per trading day. They follow a simple
strategy that places orders in a random direction at random times. Unlike professional investors,
retail investors have a limited understanding of the stock valuation and the market trend. Also, the
order volume from retail investors is usually less than professional investors.
• Momentum agents follow a simple but aggressive momentum-oriented strategy. The momentum
is determined by comparing the short-term (5-min) and long-term (30-min) moving averages of
the stock price. Momentum agents place buy orders when the short-term exceeds the long-term
moving average price. Their order quantities are similar to value agents. Momentum agents utilize
limit orders, which include a minimum price the agent will accept to sell or a maximum price it
will pay to buy. Due to this constraint, limit orders are not guaranteed to be executed.
293Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
• Herding agents are similar to momentum agents, monitoring price momentum and placing orders
accordingly. But herding agents place market orders, which guarantee immediate execution at the
best available price. So, they can rapidly push the executed price upward or downward.
3.1 Generating and Bursting Bubbles
As mentioned in Section2 , the price deviation at the early stage of a bubble starts with overwhelming orders
in one direction. Given this fact, we created bubble scenarios by configuring momentum and herding agents
– both can place a large number of orders in the same direction within a short amount of time. Specifically,
we included 1) 50 value agents, 2) 500 noise agents, 3) 8 momentum agents, 4) 5 herding agents as
rule-based market participants, and 6) a market maker agent in the simulations to create bubble scenarios.
The percentage of different types of agents is similar to the real market. In addition to generating bubbles,
we created non-bubble scenarios by removing herding agents from the simulations. An example of creating
a bubble in the simulations is shown in Figure1 . The green time series represents the fundamental value of
a stock, and the blue curve represents the executed price. Due to random price fluctuation, the short-term
moving average exceeded the long-term value at around the timestamp of 10000 seconds. Herding agents
then placed a considerable amount of buy orders that significantly increased the executed price.
Understanding that herding agents share an aggressive trading strategy and can break the balance of
the order book rapidly, we burst bubbles by setting a time constraint on herding agents that they cannot
place any orders after 12000 seconds when the intraday market simulations start. Such a time constraint
mimics regulators’ action to reduce market volatility and protect the market. This time constraint is also
illustrated in Figure1 that after 12000 seconds, herding agents stopped placing buy orders and sell orders
from value agents dominate the order book to push the price to converge back to the fundamental value.
Thus, the executed price shown in blue demonstrates an example of the generation and burst of a bubble
in our simulations.
3.2 Bubble Detection
Previous studies have proposed methods for determining the start and burst of bubbles ( Jarrow et al. 2011 ;
Shu and Zhu 2020 ;Phillips and Shi 2019 ). Since we only simulate one stock without external impacts,
we follow an intuitive metric to detect bubbles, including two measures – 1) comparing the short-term and
long-term moving averages of the stock price, and 2) comparing the executed price and the fundamental
value. It is worth noting that the second measure would only work in a simulated environment. Because
in real markets, the fundamental price is assumed but not explicitly available.
Figure1 also illustrates an example of the two measures in the bubble detection metric. The yellow and
brown curves are the short-term and long-term price moving averages. For a bubble with upward deviated
prices, as shown in Figure1 , we consider the time point when the short-term exceeds the long-term moving
average as the starting of a bubble. The ending of a bubble is when the short-term average value is lower
than the long-term average. The main body of the bubble also needs to meet the second measure that the
executed price should be larger than the fundamental price by 2.0%.
Table 1: Reinforcement learning agent state features.
Index Name Description
1 Holding The agent’s current holding
2 Imbalance The difference between the best buy and sell order volume
3 V olatility The standard deviation of a 30-min price history
4 Mid-price The latest executed price or the average of the best buy and sell price
5-9 Momentum x-min The x-min (x is 30, 60, 90, 120, or 180) momentum is an indicator of the
comparison between the 5-min and x-min moving average of the price
294Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
Table 2: Bubble measurement metrics.
Bubble Metrics Method / Calculation
Detection If is a bubble 1) Comparison of moving averages; 2) Fundamental value as a reference
Count If is a bubble, then count increments by 1
Measurement Magnitude The average difference between the fundamental value and the mid-price
in a bubble
Duration The average elapsed time in a bubble
3.3 Reinforcement Learning Agent Training and Testing
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a tool for sequential decision-making that allows learning trading agents
that execute optimally given the simulated environment. Like rule-based agents, RL agents also perceive
the market environment and place orders accordingly in the order book. But unlike rule-based agents,
they are expected to adapt to various market situations and are trained to have the optimal capability of
earning profits. The RL agents perceive and interpret the market through the state space, which includes
nine features explained and shown in Table 1 . These features were designed and configured according to
the status of the RL agent (like the “holding" feature) and the common indicators for the stock market
(like “imbalance", “volatility", “mid-price", and “momentum"). The RL agent’s policy network takes the
feature values as inputs and outputs actions to maximize the agent’s reward. Therefore, we can model
trading decisions based on signals derived from market knowledge by a Markov Decision Process and train
reinforcement learning trading agents in ABIDES.
RL agents can conduct three simulation actions: 1) buy, 2) hold or do nothing, and 3) sell. Both buy
and sell actions place market orders with a fixed quantity of shares throughout the experiments. The reward
for the RL agent is the instant profit, which is the marked-to-market value difference between the current
and the previous timestamp. The marked-to-market value is the total value of the remaining cash and the
current holding volume times the latest stock mid-price. In other words, RL agents do not need to clean
holding positions to realize profits. RL agents will be activated every minute in simulations and complete
a cycle of observing the market status, determining and conducting an action, and receiving a reward.
RL agents were trained in five market environments with different levels of bubble experience. Such
levels were represented in the increasing percentages of bubble scenarios among all training scenarios,
including 0% (without bubble experience), 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% (full bubble experience). Agents share
the same state space, action space, and reward function while training. The Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) algorithm was utilized for training these agents (Schulman et al. 2017). The first RL agent was trained
with only non-bubble scenarios. Other RL agents were trained with bubble scenarios. The percentage of
bubble scenarios during training was controlled by the random seeds in configuring agents and the market
environment. In bubble scenarios, we applied the specific random seeds generated beforehand to ensure
the scenarios included at least one bubble.
Once we had trained RL agents, they were applied to market simulations to evaluate their profit
performance and to observe their behaviors in bubble scenarios. Our main interest in the testing sessions is
the agents’ capability to affect the evolution of bubbles. Thus, we defined bubble measurement metrics in
which three measures were observed and calculated. The metrics include bubble 1) count, 2) magnitude,
and 3) duration, as illustrated in Table 2 .
4 RESULTS
RL agents trained with different levels of bubble experience were applied to the testing sessions with 100%
bubble scenarios respectively to investigate agents’ performance in terms of profit and affecting bubbles.
We applied each RL agent to the simulation with another set of pre-defined bubble seeds for 1000 runs
and collected experiment results.
295Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
(a) Resulting profit distribution comparison.
 (b) Resulting bubble count distribution comparison.
Figure 2: Profit analysis and bubble count testing results.
4.1 Profit Analysis
The first experimental outcome is the profit analyses on RL agents trained with different bubble conditions.
Such profit analyses illustrate RL agents’ profit capability in markets with bubbles. The histogram in Figure
2apresents the resulting profit distribution for the five RL agents. The RL agent trained without bubble
experience has an average profit of 0.446, which represents 44.6% of the starting cash. Meanwhile, the
standard deviation of the profit is 2.751, which indicates that the agent may result in a huge gain or loss
due to the high market volatility in some scenarios. The agent trained with 25% bubble experience has a
slightly higher profit average of 70.6%. Similarly, it also has a large standard deviation of 2.053.
As we expected, agents trained with a higher percentage of bubble experience have a higher expectation
of profit – the agent trained with 100% bubble experience has an average profit of 98.8%. While these five
profit distributions can be distinguished clearly due to the significant difference in averages, interestingly,
the profit standard deviations of these agents are similar. This indicates that even agents trained with a
higher percentage of bubble experience can be affected by the large market volatility in bubble scenarios
and can hardly maintain a stable profit level.
4.2 Bubble Measurement Metrics
The main results for answering our research questions are based on the three bubble measurement metrics
mentioned in Table2 . The resulting measures from the five agents were plotted as multi-group histograms
to illustrate how RL agents affect the bubble measurement metrics and the evolution of bubbles.
4.2.1 Bubble Count
The first metric is the bubble count. As shown on the left portion of Figure 2b , bubbles do not appear
in over 35% of the resulting runs for all agents’ testing sessions. And a monotonic trend indicates that
the higher percentage of bubble scenarios in the agent’s training, the higher the percentage of testing runs
with no bubble. Another clear trend on the right portion of Figure 2b shows that for the testing scenarios
containing bubbles, the average number of bubbles decreases with the increase of agent bubble experience.
Such a fact supports that agents with more bubble experience can suppress bubbles better.
A non-parametric statistical test of the Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance with a significance
level of α = 0.05 was conducted on the bubble count measures. Significance was observed that the p-value
is less than 0.001 and the α. This indicates that the level of bubble experience in RL agent training
significantly impacts bubble count in testing sessions – agents with more bubble experience during training
are better able to reduce the number of bubbles generated. Since agents’ only reward is profit, agents that
296Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
(a) Resulting bubble magnitude distribution comparison.
 (b) Resulting bubble duration distribution comparison.
Figure 3: Bubble magnitude and duration testing results.
have experienced bubbles would trade against the trends of bubbles to ensure profits. The more bubble
scenarios an agent experienced, the stronger the agent would counter the bubbles.
4.2.2 Bubble Magnitude
The second metric is the bubble magnitude, the average difference between the executed price and the
fundamental value within a bubble. As shown in Figure 3a , the average resulting bubble magnitude for the
RL agent trained without bubble experience is 7936.2 with a standard deviation of 8301.4. Similarly, with
the increase in agent bubble experience, the resulting bubble magnitude decreases in the testing sessions.
The average magnitude drops to 6366.2 with a standard deviation of 6419.3 for the agent trained with
100% bubble experience. The Kruskal–Wallis test result also shows significance with a p-value of 0.022,
smaller than the significance level of α = 0.05. Thus, the agent bubble experience significantly affects the
resulting bubble magnitude. As with bubble counts, greater exposure to bubbles during training causes a
learning agent to trade counter to them and increasingly suppress their magnitude.
4.2.3 Bubble Duration
The third metric is the bubble duration, which is the average elapsed time of bubbles in testing runs. The
distribution of the resulting duration for all testing sessions is shown in Figure 3b . The average bubble
duration for the RL agent trained without bubble experience is 4084.2 seconds with a standard deviation
of 2584.5. The average bubble duration for the agent trained with 100% bubble experience is 3029.2 with
a standard deviation of 2025.5. The Kruskal–Wallis test result supports the observation that the average
duration slightly decreases if the agent trained with a higher percentage of bubble scenarios with a p-value
less than 0.001, smaller than the significance level of α = 0.05. So, we can conclude that the level of
bubble experience in agents’ training impacts the resulting bubble duration during testing.
5 DISCUSSION
The RL agent testing results shown in the previous section illustrate that the level of bubble experience
in the agent training process would affect the agent’s capability of countering and suppressing bubbles.
An agent trained with a higher percentage of bubble scenarios would perform a trading strategy with a
better capability of suppressing bubbles. So, it is anticipated that the performance and tactics of the agents
trained with 0% and 100% bubble experience will vary significantly. To further analyze and compare agent
strategies, we applied these two agents to a typical bubble scenario to investigate the bubble formation in
the market and infer how the market environment would influence agent decisions and actions.
297Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
(a) The RL agent trained with 0% (without) bubble experience.
(b) The RL agent trained with 100% bubble experience.
Figure 4: A bubble scenario example with RL agent holding position and marked-to-market profit.
298Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
(a) The agent trained with 0% bubble experience.
 (b) The agent trained with 100% bubble experience.
Figure 5: Cumulative SHAP analysis for both agents in the example bubble scenario.
The resulting markets with RL agents’ marked-to-market profit and holding position were plotted as
Figure4a and 4b . The light blue curves in the main chart represent the executed prices generated from the
simulation with the same market environment but without RL agents. A bubble appears in this scenario,
starting at about 5000 seconds after the trading starts and ending at about 15000 seconds. At the bubble’s
peak, the executed price deviated from the fundamental value of over 2.5%. The green curve indicates the
mean-reverting fundamental value of the stock, representing the stock’s intrinsic value. The fundamental
value varies within a limited range of 1.0%.
5.1 Bubble Formation
The resulting bubble formation in Figure4a and 4b has a major difference illustrated by the executed prices
with RL agents. Applying the RL agent trained without bubble experience, the bubble still exists in the
market, as shown in pink. The resulting bubble’s price deviation doubled compared to the original value.
The green and red markers represent RL agents’ “buy” and “sell” orders. While there were some “sell”
orders, most orders placed by the agent were “buy” orders during the bubble generation period. This is
also supported by the RL agent holding position plot in Figure 4a that the holding volume increased when
the stock price surged. Such buy orders caused a huge loss to the agent at the end of the trading day since
the agent could not sell all holdings within a short period when the bubble burst. The agent’s profit is
indicated in the marked-to-market value plot as the percentage of the starting cash.
The agent trained with 100% bubble experience suppressed the original bubble’s price deviation. The
maximum deviation between the executed price and the fundamental value was reduced to less than 1.0%
of the fundamental value. Thus, no bubble appears in this case. At about 5000 seconds, the executed price
increased due to the overwhelming “buy” orders from the momentum and herding agents. However, the
RL agent placed “sell” orders to the opposite side of the biased order book. This is reflected in the holding
position plot in Figure4b . Such “sell” orders balanced the order book and suppressed the original bubble.
Also, these “sell” orders brought a large profit to the RL agent after the executed price dropped.
5.2 RL Agent Strategy Analyses
We ran the SHAP analysis throughout the trading day. And we collected the corresponding SHAP values
for the nice features in RL agents’ state space at all timestamps to form cumulative SHAP value scatter
plots shown in Figure5 . The cumulative SHAP value plots illustrate the overall feature importance ranking
in the state space based on all conducted actions by the agents. Different scatter colors for a specific feature
represent the degree of that feature contributing to agent actions.
Using Figure5a , which illustrates the feature importance for the agent trained without bubble experience,
as an example, the red scatters of the “imbalance” feature represent a high imbalance in the order book,
299Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
and such values lead to negative SHAP values, which indicate the “buy” action in RL agents’ action space.
In other words, if the “buy” orders or bids outweigh the “sell” orders or asks, the agent prefers to place
“buy” orders and intensify the imbalance in the order book. This agent also relies heavily on its holding
positions and the 60-min momentum of the stock price. As the second important feature, low holding
values, representing negative holding positions due to short selling, contribute to the “buy” action. When
the 60-min momentum shows an upward trend, the agent prefers to place “buy” orders. Therefore, we can
infer that the agent trained without bubble experience learned a “momentum-based” trading strategy. The
agent follows the emerging short-term trends in the order book and places orders to intensify the trends.
Understanding that the market volatility of the scenarios without a bubble is relatively low compared to
the bubble scenarios, such a short-term momentum-based strategy can benefit the agent by following the
stock’s fundamental value and making profits. However, in bubble scenarios, closely tracing the short-term
momentum and placing orders to aggravate the order book imbalance will possibly cause huge losses.
The agent trained with 100% bubble experience also relies on the “imbalance” feature, ranked as the
second feature shown in Figure 5b . However, according to the SHAP value shown in the horizontal axis,
the general influence of “imbalance” was lower compared to the other agent. High imbalance values,
indicating overwhelmed “buy” orders in the order book, contributed less to placing buy orders than the
agent without bubble experience. Also, long-term price momentum features, including 120 and 180-min,
majorly contributed to the decisions. Unlike short-term momentum tracing all price trends, 120 and 180-min
momentum filter price surges caused by minor variances and capture significant price moves with a longer
duration in bubble periods. In this scenario, high long-term momentum values led to placing “sell” orders
that suppressed bubbles. This reveals that the trading strategy of this agent majorly relies on the stock’s
intrinsic value and is more conservative to the imbalanced order book and price surges.
While training the RL agents, momentum and herding agents will push the price towards a certain
direction and create large volatility to form bubbles. However, such a direction can be upward or downward
due to the randomness in the fundamental value generated by an O-U process. So, the agent trained
with 100% bubble experience would experience large market volatility in two possible directions. Such
uncertainty and large volatility in the market cause the agent to learn conservative trading strategies, which
rely on long-term momentum, and place orders to balance the order book.
Therefore, we can conclude that these two agents demonstrated different trading strategies. The agent
trained without bubble experience closely follows the short-term price momentum and tends to place orders
to the dominant side in the order book to intensify existing momentum, thereby acting like momentum
traders. In contrast, the other agent learned a more conservative trading strategy, in which the agent
monitored long-term momentum and placed orders to suppress significant price surges back towards the
fundamental values, acting like value traders. Such strategy differences led to a considerable difference in
profit and bubble measurements.
6 CONCLUSION
In this work, we investigated the impact of experiencing asset price bubbles during training on the converged
trading strategies of reinforcement learning traders. We expected that RL agents trained with a higher
percentage of bubble scenarios would better suppress future bubbles. We specified three bubble measurement
metrics: count, magnitude, and duration. RL agents were trained with different percentages (0%, 25%,
50%, 75%, and 100%) of bubble scenarios and applied to test sessions containing at least one bubble.
Experimental results show significant differences in agent performance across all bubble measurements
and support our hypothesis that the agent’s ability to suppress bubbles increases with the percentage of
bubble scenarios in the agent’s training.
In this study, market bubbles burst via a regulatory time constraint. In future work, we plan to investigate
bubbles burst by liquidity shortage and examine how this affects market equilibrium when bubbles are
present. Also, we used a fixed order size for the actions of the RL agents. Since these agents only act
once per minute, they cannot quickly accumulate a large position. In future research, we will implement a
300Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
continuous action space for more dynamic order sizes. As the next step, we will use historical market bubble
prices to calibrate our bubble generation mechanism and further evaluate our trained agents to measure
their profit capabilities and performance of suppressing bubbles. In summary, learning from experience
can enhance RL traders’ ability to handle unusual market conditions like bubbles. Learning agents exposed
to bubbles in training can reduce market volatility and potentially prevent bubble occurrence. The results
from this study provide us insight that exposure to rare and extreme market scenarios is important for the
safety of developing large-scale autonomous trading systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper was prepared for informational purposes in part by the Artificial Intelligence Research group of
JPMorgan Chase & Co and its affiliates (“J.P. Morgan”) and is not a product of the Research Department
of J.P. Morgan. J.P. Morgan makes no representation and warranty whatsoever and disclaims all liability
for the completeness, accuracy, or reliability of the information contained herein. This document is not
intended as investment research or advice, or a recommendation, offer, or solicitation for the purchase
or sale of any security, financial instrument, financial product, or service, or to be used in any way for
evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction, and shall not constitute a solicitation under any
jurisdiction or to any person if such solicitation under such jurisdiction or to such person would be unlawful.
REFERENCES
Amrouni, S., A. Moulin, J. Vann, S. Vyetrenko, T. Balch, and M. Veloso. 2021. “ABIDES-Gym: Gym Environments for Multi-
Agent Discrete Event Simulation and Application to Financial Markets”. In Proceedings of the Second ACM International
Conference on AI in Finance , 1–9.
Balch, T. H., M. Mahfouz, J. Lockhart, M. Hybinette, and D. Byrd. 2019. “How to Evaluate Trading Strategies: Single Agent
Market Replay or Multiple Agent Interactive Simulation?”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.12010 .
Bhattacharya, U., and X. Yu. 2008. “The Causes and Consequences of Recent Financial Market Bubbles: An Introduction”.
The Review of Financial Studies 21(1):3–10.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and M. Oehmke. 2013. “Bubbles, Financial Crises, and Systemic Risk”. Handbook of the Economics of
Finance 2:1221–1288.
Byrd, D. 2019. “Explaining Agent-Based Financial Market Simulation”. CoRR abs/1909.11650.
Byrd, D., M. Hybinette, and T. H. Balch. 2019. “Abides: Towards High-Fidelity Market Simulation for AI Research”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.12066 .
Charpentier, A., R. Elie, and C. Remlinger. 2021. “Reinforcement Learning in Economics and Finance”. Computational
Economics:1–38.
Duffy, J., and M. U. Ünver. 2006. “Asset Price Bubbles and Crashes with Near-Zero-Intelligence Traders”. Economic
Theory 27(3):537–563.
Frehen, R. G., W. N. Goetzmann, and K. G. Rouwenhorst. 2013. “New Evidence on the First Financial Bubble”. Journal of
Financial Economics 108(3):585–607.
Garber, P. M. 1990. “Famous First Bubbles”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 4(2):35–54.
Jarrow, R., Y . Kchia, and P. Protter. 2011. “How to Detect an Asset Bubble”.SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics2(1):839–865.
Kolm, P. N., and G. Ritter. 2020. “Modern Perspectives on Reinforcement Learning in Finance”. Modern Perspectives on
Reinforcement Learning in Finance (September 6, 2019). The Journal of Machine Learning in Finance 1(1).
LeBaron, B. 2001. “A Builder’s Guide to Agent-Based Financial Markets”. Quantitative Finance 1(2):254.
Lux, T., and M. Marchesi. 1999. “Scaling and Criticality in a Stochastic Multi-Agent Model of a Financial Market”.
Nature 397(6719):498–500.
Lyócsa, Š., E. Baumöhl, and T. V `yrost. 2022. “YOLO Trading: Riding with the Herd During the GameStop Episode”. Finance
Research Letters 46:102359.
Ofek, E., and M. Richardson. 2003. “Dotcom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet Stock Prices”. The Journal of Fi-
nance 58(3):1113–1137.
Phillips, P. C., and S. Shi. 2019. “Detecting Financial Collapse and Ballooning Sovereign Risk”. Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics 81(6):1336–1361.
Phillips, P. C., and S.-P. Shi. 2018. “Financial Bubble Implosion and Reverse Regression”. Econometric Theory 34(4):705–753.
Phillips, P. C., and J. Yu. 2011. “Dating the Timeline of Financial Bubbles During the Subprime Crisis”. Quantitative
Economics 2(3):455–491.
301Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

Zhu, Vyetrenko, Grundl, Byrd, Dwarakanath, and Balch
Preis, T., S. Golke, W. Paul, and J. J. Schneider. 2006. “Multi-Agent-Based Order Book Model of Financial Markets”. EPL
(Europhysics Letters) 75(3):510.
Samanidou, E., E. Zschischang, D. Stauffer, and T. Lux. 2007. “Agent-Based Models of Financial Markets”. Reports on Progress
in Physics 70(3):409.
Scherbina, A., and B. Schlusche. 2014. “Asset Price Bubbles: A Survey”. Quantitative Finance 14(4):589–604.
Schulman, J., F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. 2017. “Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .
Shu, M., and W. Zhu. 2020. “Real-Time Prediction of Bitcoin Bubble Crashes”. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its
Applications 548:124477.
Sornette, D., and P. Cauwels. 2014. “Financial Bubbles: Mechanisms and Diagnostics”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.2140 .
Uhlenbeck, G. E., and L. S. Ornstein. 1930. “On The Theory of The Brownian Motion”. Physical Review 36(5):823.
Vyetrenko, S., D. Byrd, N. Petosa, M. Mahfouz, D. Dervovic, M. Veloso, and T. Balch. 2020. “Get Real: Realism Metrics
for Robust Limit Order Book Market Simulations”. In Proceedings of the First ACM International Conference on AI in
Finance, 1–8.
Westphal, R., and D. Sornette. 2020. “Market Impact and Performance of Arbitrageurs of Financial Bubbles in an Agent-Based
Model”. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 171:1–23.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
HAIBEI ZHU is a Research Scientist at J.P. Morgan AI Research, concentrating on synthetic data, multi-agent systems,
and reinforcement learning. He received his Ph.D. from Duke, where his research centered on human-computer interaction
and machine learning. Upon joining AI Research, he focused on simulating market scenarios with financial bubbles within
multi-agent environments and training reinforcement learning traders. He is also engaged in research dedicated to generating
high-fidelity synthetic time series data. His email address is haibei.zhu@jpmchase.com .
SVITLANA VYETRENKO is a Research Director at J.P. Morgan AI Research and a Lecturer at UC Berkeley. She holds a
Ph.D. from the California Institute of Technology, where she also earned her Master of Science. Svitlana has over a decade of
experience in the financial industry. Her expertise spans quantitative research, machine learning, multi-agent simulations, and
reinforcement learning. As a Research Director, she leads projects on market simulations and time series synthetic data. With
a passion for cutting-edge research, Svitlana is dedicated to advancing the field of artificial intelligence and its applications in
the financial industry. Her email address is svitlana.s.vyetrenko@jpmchase.com .
SERAFIN GRUNDL is a Principal Economist at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in the Division for Research
& Statistics. His research is mainly focused on industrial organization; in particular, identification and estimation of first-
price auctions, and various topics in antitrust (e.g. mergers & common ownership). In his policy work, he assesses the
competitive effects of bank mergers and other antitrust issues in the banking industry. His email address isserafin.j.grundl@frb.gov .
DA VID BYRD is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at Bowdoin College, where he teaches courses in artificial
intelligence and financial machine learning. His current areas of research interest include normative guidance for intelli-
gent financial agents, market simulation, automated portfolio inference, and deep reinforcement learning. Dr. Byrd holds
a Ph.D. in computer science from Georgia Tech, for which he developed the ABIDES simulation engine, now widely
used to study complex systems of distributed intelligent agents. His most recent work investigates how intelligent agents
may inadvertently learn to spoof the stock market, and how we might discourage them. His email address isd.byrd@bowdoin.edu .
KSHAMA DW ARAKANATHis a Research Scientist at J.P. Morgan AI Research working on using reinforcement learning to
design and learn trading agents with diverse objectives in simulated multi-agent markets. She completed her Master’s degree at
UC Berkeley, focused on nonlinear systems and control engineering. Her interests lie in the fields of reinforcement learning,
multi-agent simulations, and mechanism design. Her email address is kshama.dwarakanath@jpmorgan.com .
TUCKER BALCH is a computer scientist, researcher, and educator specializing in AI, Robotics, and Finance. He earned his
Bachelor’s degree and Ph.D. in Computer Science from the Georgia Institute of Technology. Dr. Balch has published over 120
peer-reviewed research papers. He has held research and teaching positions at Carnegie Mellon University and Georgia Institute
of Technology. In the financial industry, Dr. Balch co-founded Lucena Research. He currently serves as a managing director
at J.P. Morgan AI Research, leading teams exploring ML and Cryptography, multi-agent system simulations, high-frequency
electronic markets, and Synthetic Data for Finance. He is also an online education pioneer, developing and teaching MOOCs like
"Computational Investing" and "Machine Learning for Trading," which have reached over 170,000 students worldwide. Before
his research career, Balch served as an F-15 pilot in the U.S. Air Force. His email address is tucker.balch@jpmchase.com .
302Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on August 26,2026 at 18:58:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
