Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
Available online 21 October 2020
1364-0321/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Review and analysis of investment decision making algorithms in long-term 
agent-based electric power system simulation models 
Zhenmin Tao a,b, Jorge Andr´es Moncada a,b, Kris Poncelet a,b, Erik Delarue a,b,* 
a Division TME, Department of Mechanical Engineering, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 300, 3001, Leuven, Belgium 
b EnergyVille, Thor Park 8310 & 8320, 3600, Genk, Belgium   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Investment decision making algorithms 
Agent-based simulation modeling 
Generation expansion planning 
Optimization modeling 
ABSTRACT  
Long-term electric power system planning models are frequently used to provide policy support in the context of 
the ongoing transition towards a low-carbon electric power system. In a liberalized market, this transition relies 
on generation company investment decisions. These decisions are shaped by both economic and behavioral 
factors. Agent-based modeling allows the incorporation of both these factors in the description of the investment 
decision making process. Nevertheless, there are several challenges associated with the design of agent-based 
models such as the definition of the model structure and its lack of transparency. In this study, we aim to in-
crease the transparency of investment decision making algorithms by shedding light on how implicit assumptions 
of the price projection methods used in these algorithms impact model results. To achieve this goal, we devel-
oped a core long-term agent-based model to assess different investment decision making algorithms from the 
literature and we introduced a novel price projection method based on optimization modeling. Our results show 
that investment decisions vary enormously depending on the assumptions and parameters used in investment 
decision making algorithms. We also found that our proposed price projection method is robust to parametric 
deviations. Thus, the proposed investment decision making algorithm enables agent-based modelers to mitigate 
the potential impacts of hidden implicit assumptions.   
1. Introduction 
In a liberalized electricity market, the ongoing energy system tran-
sition towards a low-carbon electric power system is highly dependent 
on investment decisions. Many studies have shown that investors’ de-
cisions are not only driven by economic factors [1,2]. Actors’ behaviors, 
values, and strategies as well as policies, regulations, and markets also 
shape the electric power system transition [3,4]. Empirical studies based 
on interviews with over a hundred industry experts have revealed that 
investors’ renewable energy technical know-how and a-priori beliefs on 
the technical effectiveness play much more important roles than tech-
nical information in investment decision making [5,6]. Other empirical 
studies highlighted the importance of technology preferences, prior in-
vestments, and financial status to explain differences in investments. 
Bergek et al. presented empirical evidence showing that renewable en-
ergy investments are made by a heterogeneous group of investors and 
their investments vary among investor types [7]. Accounting for these 
above-mentioned factors calls for modeling techniques capable of rep-
resenting investors and their decision-making process explicitly. 
Agent-based modeling allows the incorporation of both economic 
and non-economic factors in the description of the investment decision 
making process [8,9]. Nevertheless, despite numerous benefits, there 
are several challenges associated with the design of agent-based models 
such as the definition of the model structure and its lack of transparency. 
In this study, we aim to increase the transparency of investment decision 
making algorithms by shedding light on how implicit assumptions of the 
price projection methods used in these algorithms impact model results. 
An investment decision making algorithm in a long-term agent-based 
model typically consists of three steps. First, projections are made 
regarding the short-run profits/rents (i.e., the revenues subtracted by 
the operational expenditures) that can be obtained for potential in-
vestments. Second, these projections are used to evaluate the profit-
ability of potential investments. The profitability is typically expressed 
by calculating common metrics, such as the net present value (NPV) or 
the internal rate of return (IRR). In a third and final step, the most 
profitable investment, if any, is selected. This process is typically 
repeated until none of the agents is willing to invest anymore. The main 
challenge that these models face resides in the first step, i.e., designing a 
suitable method that allows the agents to make projections of future 
* Corresponding author. Division TME, Department of Mechanical Engineering, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 300, 3001, Leuven, Belgium. 
E-mail address: erik.delarue@kuleuven.be (E. Delarue).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/rser 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110405 
Received 26 February 2020; Received in revised form 14 July 2020; Accepted 20 September 2020

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
2
revenue/price streams. Whereas existing agent-based models are 
aligned on the metrics and criteria used for making an investment de-
cision (e.g., a non-negative NPV or a minimum IRR), the methods used 
in different existing long-term agent-based models to project future 
prices or revenue streams vary strongly (see Section 3.2 for a detailed 
description). 
Therefore, this study aims to analyze different price projection 
methods adopted in existing long-term agent-based electric power sys-
tem simulation models. Furthermore, a price projection method based 
on optimization modeling is proposed and evaluated against existing 
price projection methods on a level playing field – a core long-term 
agent-based simulation model. This paper contributes to the literature 
in the following ways:  
i. The price projection methods in existing long-term agent-based 
electric power system simulation models are reviewed and 
compared.  
ii. The impacts of the methods used to project future prices/revenue 
streams on the outcome of long-term agent-based models are 
assessed. Specific attention is given to both the influence of (agent- 
level) price projection methods on the (system-level) simulation re-
sults and the ability of price projection methods to take specific 
scenario-related information into account. 
iii A price projection method based on optimization modeling is pro-
posed. The proposed novel method provides a theoretical benchmark 
for further extension of the long-term agent-based model and allows 
combining the transparency of optimization models with the flexi-
bility of agent-based models to consider behavioral aspects. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 re-
views the development and application of agent-based modeling in the 
context of electric power systems, specific attention is paid to long-term 
agent-based models. Section 3 introduces the methods used to carry out 
the analysis. This section starts with introducing the core long-term 
agent-based model, followed by detailed descriptions of existing and 
our proposed price projection methods. Next, Section 4 presents the key 
data and assumptions adopted in the proof-of-concept case study. Sec-
tion 5 discusses the results generated by applying different price pro-
jection methods. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section 6. 
2. Literature survey of agent-based models 
Over the past decades, agent-based modeling has been used to 
answer multiple types of research questions in the context of electric 
power systems. Overall, two sets of agent-based models can be identi-
fied: short-term agent-based models and long-term agent-based models. 
These two types of agent-based models are often used for different 
purposes and the focus of this paper is on long-term agent-based models. 
A classification of agent-based models and their applications/capabil-
ities are summarized in Table 1. 
Short-term agent-based models are mainly used to study the bidding 
game in a market under different market designs and the resulting 
market efficiency or exercise of market power. A comprehensive review 
of short-term agent-based models can be found in Ref. [26,27]. Here-
under, some of the key studies on short-term agent-based models will be 
briefly reviewed. The earliest applications of agent-based modeling in 
electricity markets date back to the late 1990s where there was a global 
trend of liberalizing electricity markets. Agent-based modeling was 
identified as a proper method to study the market effectiveness under 
different market designs, as it allowed relaxing assumptions such as 
stable market equilibria and price-taking agents. The earliest studies 
evaluated the market design in two dimensions: market clearing fre-
quency and pricing mechanisms [10,11]. These earlier models are 
relatively abstract and built upon assumptions such as 
profit-maximizing agents, inelastic demand, and congestion-free sys-
tems. Later, other researchers contributed to the community by 
extending the abstract model in different directions to answer research 
questions related to market outcomes under the influences of grid con-
straints [12,15], unit commitment constraints [16], cross border trading 
[13] and demand response [17]. 
Unlike short-term agent-based models that focus on the outcome of 
spot markets, long-term agent-based models are developed to study the 
electric power system transition with a time scale varying from years to 
decades. These studies are usually performed to assess the influence of 
specific factors such as renewable energy support design [18], CO2 
market design [28], capacity remuneration mechanisms [20–22], and 
technological preferences [24] on the evolution of the system. 
In the past decades, a limited number of agent-based modeling 
frameworks have incorporated investment decision making at the agent 
level, for instance PowerACE [29,30], AMIRIS [31], EMCAS [32,33] and 
EMLab [23,34,35]. PowerACE is an agent-based modeling framework 
developed to analyze the impact of different market designs (e.g. 
energy-only market, capacity remuneration mechanisms) and policy 
measures on investment in renewable energy sources and their contri-
bution to the security of supply on national and European level [30]. The 
model aims at coupling different markets (spot market, forward market, 
Nomenclature 
j Type of technologies 
y Year 
d Day 
h Hour 
Δt Time step (typically 1 h) (h) 
r Interest rate 
fj,y Fixed cost of technology type j in year y (€/MW/a) 
Gj,y The installed capacity of technology type j in year y (MW) 
Wd The weight of representative day d 
γj,h The capacity factor of technology type j in hour h 
vj,y,d,h The variable cost of technology type j in year y on 
representative day d at hour h (€/MWh) 
gj,y,d,h The actual power output of technology type j in year y on 
representative day d at hour h (MW) 
py,d,h The market price in year y on representative day d at hour h 
(€/MWh) 
lly,d,h Load loss in year y on representative day d at hour h (MWh) 
VoLL Value of lost load (€/MWh) 
fCAPEX
j The annual investment cost of technology type j (€/MW/a) 
Pj The principal of technology type j (€/MW) 
fO&M
j,y The fixed operational & maintenance cost of technology 
type j in year y (€/MW/a) 
vO&M
j,y,d,h Variable operational & cost of technology type j in year y 
on representative day d at hour h (€/MWh) 
vfuel
j,y,d,h Fuel price of technology type j in year y on representative 
day d at hour h (€/MWh) 
μj The energy conversion efficiency of technology type j 
Ly,d,h The load in year y on representative day d at hour h (MWh) 
invj,y The investment in technology type j in year y (MW) 
decj,y The decommissioning in technology type j in year y (MW) 
nj The lifetime of technology type j  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
3
CO2 market and reserve market) and has been utilized to address various 
research questions such as the influence of renewables on spot market 
prices [36], the economic performance of CO2 market design [37] and 
the impact of a soft loan on renewable generation expansion [19]. 
AMIRIS (Agent-based Model for the Integration of Renewables Into the 
Power System) is a policy design tool used to foster the integration of 
renewable energy sources into the electricity market. The model is 
designed to study different renewable energy trading schemes, with 
specific attention paid to evaluating the effectiveness of a direct mar-
keting policy1 against the inefficient (yet effective) feed-in-tariff sub-
sidies. To compare the policy effectiveness, the power producer agents 
are provided with five different business models and the outcomes can 
be compared [31]. EMCAS (Electricity Market Complex Adaptive Sys-
tems) was originally designed without investment decision making 
module but rather aims to simulate agents’ behavior in the spot market. 
The original EMCAS consists of generation company agents, trans-
mission system operator agents, consumer agents and regulator agents. 
The learning capabilities of agents are provided by genetic algorithms.2 
With the help of these different types of agents, the model is capable of 
studying various market organizations such as locational marginal 
pricing [38], congestions charges [39], bilateral contracts [40] and 
ancillary service markets [33]. Later, the EMCAS framework has been 
extended to be capable of studying long-term generation expansion 
[32]. EMLab (Energy Modelling Laboratory) is a long-term agent-based 
modeling framework designed to assess the effects of different policy 
instruments and market designs. These effects are reflected in the form 
of the aggregation of generation companies’ investment decisions. 
Hence, the main agents in the model are the electricity generation 
companies and these agents interact mainly in electricity and CO2 
markets [34,35]. As a long-term agent-based electric power system 
model with a minimal time step of one year, EMLab is suitable for 
capturing factors that influence the system evolution in a time span of 
years (or even decades) such as capacity mechanisms [22] and emission 
trading [28]. In Ref. [23], the author validated the EMLab model using 
sensitivity analyses from multiple aspects: theoretical and empirical. 
From the theoretical viewpoint, the dynamic behavior of the model and 
trend of producer profits (as the installed capacity approaches the load 
peak) are tested. Empirically, the model has been validated by 
comparing the model output to historical prices. 
3. Methods 
To effectively assess the influence of price projection methods on the 
simulation results, a core long-term agent-based modeling framework is 
developed and different price projection methods are deployed in its 
investment decision making algorithm, while keeping all other 
modeling settings constant. The core agent-based modeling framework 
is further stripped of distinctive features such as behavioral aspects. That 
is, in this analysis, we assume all agents to be fully rational, forward- 
looking price takers. Moreover, we assume that exogenous inputs such 
as fuel prices and technological costs remain constant. Using this set of 
assumptions allows obtaining a well-defined benchmark, i.e., the long- 
run equilibrium serves as a reference solution. More specifically, 
under this set of assumptions, the agent-based model should converge to 
the long-run equilibrium.3 The number of converging milestone years 
varies from case to case, in general, it takes around 4 milestone years. 
This is mainly due to that, after the 3rd milestone year, all initial ca-
pacity mixes are fully decommissioned. Deviations from this long-run 
equilibrium can then be interpreted as impacts of the price projection 
method used. Note that the aim of using the long-run equilibrium as a 
reference is to assess possible impacts of price projection methods. The 
agent-based model was implemented in Julia programming language.4 
In the rest of this section, the formulation of the core long-term 
agent-based model and the different price projection methods 
analyzed in this study are described in detailed. The description of the 
core long-term agent-based model follows the ODD (Overview, Design 
concepts and Details) protocol as proposed by Grimm et al. [41]. 
3.1. Core agent-based simulation model formulation 
3.1.1. Overview 
3.1.1.1. Purpose. The purpose of the core long-term agent-based model 
is to analyze different investment decision making algorithms. This is 
achieved by deploying different price projection methods in its invest-
ment decision making algorithm, while keeping all other modeling 
settings constant. 
3.1.1.2. Entities, state variables and scales. Three types of agents (en-
tities) are considered in the core long-term agent-based model: genera-
tion companies, the market operator and consumers. The main 
characteristic of a generation company agent is its technology portfolio. 
The state variable of a market operator is the market electricity price. 
Consumers are characterized by their load profiles. 
As a long-term model, the simulation covers several decades while 
the time resolution is 1 h. Thus, two key concepts are introduced to 
couple the long-term planning (with a time span of decades) with the 
short-term operation (with hourly resolution): representative days and 
milestone years. Fig. 1 shows an exemplary scheme of representative 
days and milestone years. Intuitively, representative days seek to reduce 
Table 1 
Summary of agent-based models used in the context of electric power systems.  
Classification Key agent decision Key modeling purposes Example(s) 
Short-term agent-based 
models 
Bidding strategies Market efficiency w.r.t. market designs. [10–12] 
Influence of market power exercise. [13,14] 
Bidding strategies and their resulting impacts considering technical constraints, cross border trading 
and demand response. 
[12,13, 
15–17] 
Long-term agent-based 
models 
Investment decision 
making 
Policy evaluation (e.g. renewable subsidies). [18,19] 
Energy system transition w.r.t. market designs. [20–23] 
The influence of agents’ bounded rational behaviors in the long-run. [24,25]  
1 The details of the direct marketing scheme can be found in Ref. [50]. 
Overall, this direct marketing strategy grant freedom to wind turbine operators 
to be able to have a monthly choice to switch between trading in wholesale 
market and receiving a fixed feed-in tariff.  
2 Genetic algorithms are a set of machine learning algorithms which are used 
to search for the optimal solution of a problem. The term “genetic” refers to the 
evolutionary searching manner which imitates the evolution processes in na-
ture: selection, crossover and mutation. We refer interested readers to Ref. [51] 
for a comprehensive explanation of genetic algorithms. 
3 Note that depending on the price projection method used, the equilibrium 
computed in the agent-based model does not necessarily converge to a single 
value but rather revolves dynamically around the equilibrium. In such a case, 
the average of the dynamic equilibrium is considered as the equilibrium 
reached by an agent-based model.  
4 The agent-based model is accessible via: https://github.com/zhe 
nmin1993/ELDEST-ABM. 
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
4
the actual days in a year by finding a certain number of days and their 
corresponding weights that minimize the deviation from the full hourly 
profiles. These profiles include load and intermittent sources such as 
wind and solar PV. The method of determining representative days is 
based on [42], in which the boundary days (i.e. peak and minimum load 
days) are appropriately considered. The resulting reduced load duration 
curve in contrast with the original load duration curve is shown in 
Fig. A1 (Appendix I). 
Without loss of generality, the introduction of milestone years (MYs) 
is equivalent to the assumption that the system capacity mix will remain 
unchanged within a certain period of time, i.e., new investments or 
decommissioning can only happen in certain milestone years. Moreover, 
new investments are considered to be immediately available from the 
corresponding milestone year. 
3.1.1.3. Process overview and scheduling. As indicated by the rectangles 
in Fig. 2, four main processes are executed in our core agent-based 
model: bidding in the spot market, determination of the market price, 
decommissioning of generators and investment in new capacity. The 
narrative of the core agent-based model is as follows. The bidding 
process in the spot market is carried out by the energy producers and 
all generators are assumed to bid their marginal costs.5 Then, the 
market operator determines the market price by maximizing social 
welfare. When a milestone year is reached, generation companies first 
decommission generation units that have reached their lifetimes, 
followed by an investment process where generation companies make 
investment decisions sequentially. The investment process is further 
divided into investment rounds. During each round, each generation 
company is allowed to invest only once and in one generation unit. 
The size of a generation unit is fixed and set in a manner that all 
agents have approximately equal chances of being the first investor in 
the corresponding investment process, hence the influence of the first- 
mover advantage can be mitigated. The investment process is termi-
nated when none of the generation companies has invested in the last 
round, i.e. no generation companies is willing to invest anymore. It is 
assumed that preceding generation companies’ investment decisions are 
known by the subsequent generation companies. During the investment 
decision making process, the profitability of all types of technologies are 
determined by calculating their NPVs. 
3.1.2. Design concepts  
• Basic principle: the principle applied in the model is the rational 
choice theory. This theory is used to describe decision making on 
both spot market bidding and new capacity investments.  
• Emergence: an important emergent phenomenon in this study is the 
resulting capacity mix. Other emergent phenomena include the day- 
ahead market prices and the annual loss of load hours. 
• Adaptation/Prediction: generation companies adapt their invest-
ment strategies based on future day-ahead market price projections. 
Evaluating the generation of these projections is one of the key 
contributions of this study.  
• Objective: the objective of the generation companies is to optimize 
their generation portfolio to maximize profit by investing in new 
power plants.  
• Learning: in this core long-term agent-based model, the learning 
capability has been stripped to simplify the analyses. 
• Sensing: agents are assumed to know without uncertainty the pre-
ceding generation companies’ investment decisions.  
• Interaction: generation companies interact with each other indirectly 
through the price signals in the day-ahead market. That is, each 
newly installed power plant will lower the market price, therefore 
squeeze the profit margin of new investment.  
• Stochasticity: the order of how generation companies carry out the 
investment is random.  
• Observation: the key observation in this study is the system capacity 
mix, which reflects the impacts of agent-level investment decision 
making algorithms on system level. Agent level observations such as 
generation portfolios are out of the scope of this study because the 
generation companies are assumed to be homogeneous. 
3.1.3. Details 
3.1.3.1. Initialization.  
• Initialization of existing capacity mix 
The model is initialized with a uniformly distributed existing ca-
pacity mix in the system, i.e. different types of technologies occupy the 
same amount of market share. Note that this initialization aims to 
deviate from the long-run equilibrium solution to ensure that reaching 
this equilibrium is not a result of the initial capacity mix.  
• Initialization of generation company agents 
The model is initialized with 5 generation company agents and the 
existing capacity mix is assigned to these generation companies 
randomly. In this study, the initialization of generation companies will 
not change the results and conclusions as they are homogeneous. 
3.1.3.2. Input data. In this study, the Belgian electric power system load 
data6 (with hourly resolution) of the year 2015 is used. A Value of Lost 
Load (VoLL) of 3000 €/MWh and an interest rate of 5% are also used. To 
simplify the analyses, this study only considers highly stylized dis-
patchable technologies, namely base-load, mid-load and peak-load 
technologies. These technologies resemble respectively nuclear, coal 
and gas power plants whose techno-economic characteristics are based 
on the collected data in Ref. [44]. The techno-economic characteristics 
of these technologies are shown in Table 2. 
3.1.3.3. Submodels. The algorithm that describes the investment in new 
power plants consists of three steps. This investment decision making 
algorithm is followed by every single generation company. First, market 
conditions regarding the future electric power system are derived by 
taking capacity mix evolution, fuel prices and load data into consider-
ation. Second, the future market condition is used to project future 
market prices. Different price projection methods are elaborated in 
Fig. 1. An example of the temporal representation via representative days [43].  
5 Depending on the purpose of the research, this can easily be changed if 
desirable. 
6 The data is publicly accessible on the website of ELIA (Belgian transmission 
system operator). Link: http://www.elia.be/en/grid-data/data-download. 
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
5
Section 3.2. Third, the profitability of each candidate power plant is 
assessed by calculating its NPV. Finally, the power plant that renders the 
highest NPV is selected. The NPV calculation takes into account the 
expected revenue, the expected cost, and the discount factor (repre-
senting the minimal expected rate of return). The formula to calculate 
NPV is shown in Eq. (1):  
where r denotes the annual interest rate and γj,y,d,h represents the ca-
pacity factors. 
The fixed cost term fj,y, being independent of the actual electricity 
generation gj,y,d,h, is the sum of the annualized investment cost fCAPEX
j and 
the fixed operation and maintenance (FOM) cost of the corresponding 
technology fO&M
j . Mathematically, the fixed costs of each installed gen-
eration unit calculated as in Eq. (2): 
fj,y=fO&M
j +fCAPEX
j ,∀j∈ J,∀y∈ Y (2)  
where the investment cost is calculated with Eq. (3): 
fCAPEX
j =Pj ⋅ r⋅(1+r)nj
(1+r)nj   1,∀j∈ J (3) 
The variable cost term vj,y,d,h, calculated via Eq. (4), is dependent on 
the actual electricity generation and consist of fuel costs (plus emission 
costs and taxes) vfuel
j,y,d,h/μj and variable operations and maintenance costs 
(VOM) vO&M
j,y,d,h. 
vj,y,d,h=vO&M
j,y,d,h+vfuel
j,y,d,h
μj
,∀j∈ J,∀y∈ Y,∀d∈ D,∀h∈ H (4) 
The key assumptions that underpin the model structure are listed 
below7:  
• The load data is assumed to remain unchanged and repeated every 
year. For each hour, the load is assumed to be inelastic.  
• The techno-economic characteristics for all technologies are 
assumed to be constant over the whole simulation period.  
• The selection and corresponding weights of the representative days 
are assumed to remain unchanged in the future.  
• Generation company agents’ investment decisions are not subject to 
budget constraints. 
Fig. 2. Flowchart of the core long-term agent-based model.  
NPVj=
∑
y
(
1
(1+r)y
(
 
  fj,y ⋅Gj,y
)
+
(∑
d
∑
h
Wy,d ⋅γj,y,d,h ⋅gj,y,d,h ⋅
 
py,d,h  vj,y,d,h
)
)))
(1)   
7 Note that these assumptions are only essential for this specific theoretical 
study. One can change these assumptions accordingly if the model is used for 
case-specific analyses. 
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
6
Note that these assumptions are deployed in this theoretical study 
that mainly focuses on methodological analyses, and they are essential 
to enhance the transparency of the analyses. If the model is to be used for 
a case-specific analysis, these assumptions can be relaxed. 
3.2. The architecture of different price projection methods 
In existing long-term agent-based modeling frameworks, two 
different types of price projection methods can be identified: exogenous 
price projection methods and endogenous price projection methods. 
Each type can be further differentiated by the form of essential infor-
mation provided as input to the corresponding method. Table 3 presents 
an overview of price projection methods adopted in existing long-term 
agent-based modeling frameworks. 
One can distinguish from Table 3 that both types of existing price 
projection methods rely on a so-called virtual market clearing simulation 
module. This module determines projections of future electricity prices 
and operating hours for different investment options by combining the 
projections of the future capacity mix with fuel prices, demand and 
technological information. Although the virtual market clearing mod-
ules are formulated (and named) differently in these referenced frame-
works, they can all be interpreted as a merit-order based, supply- 
demand matching market clearing algorithm. 
We build a generalized merit-order based virtual market clearing 
simulation module, which is shown in Fig. 3. In the virtual market 
clearing simulation process, the market is cleared each time step based 
on the capacity mix projection over a look-ahead horizon. This look- 
ahead horizon parameter determines how far in the future an agent 
can have access to information when an investment object is evaluated. 
This parameter has been named as “forecast period” and “reference year 
time horizon” in Refs. [32,35], respectively. 
Given the similarities of how future information is processed, 
important differences exist in terms of how future capacity mixes are 
projected. In the following, existing price projection methods will be 
described in detail, with special attention paid to capacity mix projec-
tion composition. A novel (endogenous) price projection method is also 
introduced. 
3.2.1. Exogenous price projection methods 
Exogenous price projection methods rely on information about the 
future system from sources that are independent of the model itself. This 
information usually appears in one of two forms: future electricity prices 
or the evolution of the future capacity mix. 
Projections of future electricity price information can be obtained in 
various ways. As an example, future electricity prices can be obtained by 
extrapolating past electricity prices using pattern recognition methods, 
as in Ref. [46]. A future capacity mix is typically drawn from third-party 
reports or research findings. With this information, the agents can run a 
virtual market clearing simulation module to retrieve expected future 
revenues and infra-marginal rents. 
Concerning the price projection methods in existing agent-based 
modeling frameworks, the Exo. 1 price projection method retrieves 
future price information directly from interviews of market participants. 
The Exo. 2 electricity price projection method divides future electricity 
prices into two intervals: the first five years and the further future. 
During the first five years, it is assumed that the electricity price is the 
same as the spot market price in the current year. In the further future, 
the electricity price is calculated based on the capacity mix projection in 
a published report. 
Despite the relatively straightforward implementation process, there 
are clear limitations of exogenous price projection methods. First, the 
modeling results are fully driven by the exogenously determined ca-
pacity mix/price projections. That is, the projections (and hence the 
decisions) of an agent are always in line with the exogenous input, 
regardless of the actual investment decisions made earlier by other 
agents. Therefore, the decisions taken by the agents during the 
simulation do not impact the decisions taken by other agents. In reality, 
however, there are strong interlinkages. For instance, the market value 
of wind generations tends to decrease significantly with the total 
installed wind power capacity. Second, relying on exogenous capacity 
mix/price projections data results in loss of flexibility in establishing 
case-specific scenarios. That is, one is restricted to using data from 
existing reports/surveys. In addition, the lack of interaction among 
agents results in loss of flexibility in terms of capturing some factors such 
as social influence8 and endogenous risk perceptions. 
3.2.2. Endogenous price projection methods 
As the name implies, in endogenous price projection methods, the 
agents endogenously project future prices (and corresponding revenues 
and infra-marginal rents) during the simulation, i.e. the user does not 
need to supply (all) direct information regarding future electricity prices 
or the future capacity mix evolution. 
Examples of agent-based modeling frameworks that have adopted 
endogenous price projection methods include for instance Ref. [24,32, 
35]. In these references, the price projection method generally consists 
of two steps. In the first step, projections are made regarding the future 
capacity mix. In the second step, the capacity mix projections are used as 
an input in the virtual market clearing simulation module. 
The Endo. 1 price projection method is shown in Fig. 4a. Here, agents 
project the capacity mix in a given future year by starting from the 
existing capacity mix and adding the already announced or built new 
capacities (i.e., the investment decisions made by other agents during 
the course of the simulation) and subtracting the capacities reaching life 
expectancies before that given year. Although this approach seems 
reasonable at first sight, in this method the agents implicitly assume 
that, when projecting the prices in a given future year, no new invest-
ment decisions will happen between the current model year and a given 
future year. Given that these future investments make up a bigger share 
of the capacity mix as one looks further into the future (as a result of 
decommissioning of existing plants), this method has its limitations for 
projecting revenue streams further into the future. For this reason, this 
method henceforth will be referred to as “myopic agents”. The term 
“myopic” refers to an agent being short-sighted in terms of the infor-
mation being considered regarding future market conditions. For this 
method, the choice of the look-ahead horizon could substantially influ-
ence the resulting macro-system-level capacity mix evolution. As will be 
shown in Section 5.1, the assumption that the agents do not anticipate 
investments made in future years makes the simulation results sensitive 
to different look-ahead horizons. In addition, this method does not allow 
anticipating expected changes in the capacity mix, such as the possible 
expectation of increasing penetration of renewable energy sources in the 
future electricity system. 
Fig. 4b represents the Endo. 2 price projection method. In addition to 
the information already considered by the “myopic agents” method, the 
Endo. 2 price projection method considers projections for future in-
vestments of competitors. Similar to the “myopic agents” method, the 
resulting projections of the future capacity mix are then used as inputs in 
the virtual market clearing simulation module to project future elec-
tricity prices. For investment decision making, the model presented in 
Ref. [32] includes uncertainties regarding the load growth, hydropower 
conditions, and the investments made by competitors in future years. 
The uncertainties are represented via a scenario tree, as visualized in 
Fig. 5. As shown on the right-hand side of Fig. 5, for each agent,9 the 
8 In Ref. [52], social influence is defined as “change in a person’s cognition, 
attitude, or behavior, which has its origin in another person or group.” 
9 As this specific study is based on a highly stylized system and mainly fo-
cuses on simulation results on system level, it is assumed that agents are ho-
mogeneous. Hence, using one scenario tree for each agent is equivalent to using 
one common scenario tree for all agents. Nevertheless, the model is designed to 
allow agents to have diversified scenario tree if desired. 
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
7
uncertainty regarding competitors’ capacity expansion decisions is 
composed of two layers: the total capacity installed and the distribution 
of this capacity among different technology types. In the first layer, 3 
branches varying in the total capacity installed by competitors are 
considered, and probabilities are assigned to each of these branches. In 
the second layer, each branch is further split into 3 sub-branches varying 
in the distribution of the total installed capacity among different tech-
nology types. It is important to note that, although the agents make 
endogenous projections of the future capacity mix, the projections in 
this method are strongly determined by exogenous inputs (i.e., the 
amount and distribution of capacity investments by competitors in each 
scenario, and the probabilities assigned to the different scenarios). 
Therefore, this method will be referred to as the “exogenous scenarios for 
future investments” method in the remainder of this text. 
Similar to the exogenous price projection methods, this method has 
certain clear limitations. The primary limitation is the availability of 
parameters for the scenario tree, which results in loss of flexibility in 
establishing case-specific scenarios. Alternatively, one can carefully 
calibrate the scenario tree with the help of historical system capacity 
mix development. This type of calibration can influence the simulation 
results by presuming that the future capacity mix evolves in a similar 
manner to the past, which has been proved to be inappropriate because 
of various factors such as the emergence of new technologies and new 
entrepreneurial competitors [47]. Moreover, as the total capacity 
parameter determines the residual space for the corresponding agent (to 
invest in), the new investments in a milestone year are approximately 
the sum of all agents’ residual space. This interplay between the 
parameter total capacity and the total number of agents further reduces 
the transparency of the agent-based model: even small deviations on 
exogenous inputs to agents’ investment decision making can be ampli-
fied by the magnitude of the total number of agents and might strongly 
shape the core macro-system-level results of the model. A sensitivity 
analysis of the parameters of the scenario tree is carried out in Section 
4.2. 
3.2.3. Novel optimization-based price projection method 
As presented in Fig. 6, in the novel optimization-based price pro-
jection method, the agents make price projections by solving a genera-
tion expansion planning problem (i.e., a traditional long-term electric 
power system optimization model). The interpretation of this method is 
that each agent assumes that the system capacity mix will evolve in a 
cost-minimizing manner when making long-term price projections10. 
For this reason, this method henceforth will be referred to as the “cost- 
minimizing future investments” method. The information regarding the 
current capacity mix, already announced investments and future 
decommissioning plans/expectations is used as input to the generation 
expansion planning problem. The output information from this gener-
ation expansion planning problem is twofold: shadow price and capacity 
mix projections. A similar method has been adopted in Ref. [48], where 
the authors present a price projection method assuming that the ca-
pacity mix will reach the optimal portfolio by the end of the look-ahead 
horizon. The price projection method interpolate prices between a 
myopic short-term market equilibrium and a long-term greenfield 
equilibrium, the price information between the short-term and the 
long-term equilibrium is approximated using an exponential function. 
One of the fundamental improvements of the (optimization-based) price 
projection method proposed in this study is that the price information is 
based on the capacity mix evolution instead of a function-based 
Table 2 
Techno-economic characteristics for the considered technologies.  
Technology Size of one unit (MW) Lifetime (year) VOM (€/MWh) Fuel price (€/MWh) Efficiency FOM (€/kW/a) Capital cost (€/kW) 
Base-load 100 20 5 3 0.4 80 3000 
Mid-load 100 20 4 15 0.48 40 1200 
Peak-load 100 20 4 25 0.6 17 800  
Table 3 
Summary of price projection methods in existing long-term agent-based 
modeling frameworks.  
Classification Short description of the price projection 
methods 
Example 
(s) 
Exogenous Exo. 1 Price projection based on the information 
provided by market participants. 
[31] 
Exo. 2 Virtual market clearing with exogenous 
capacity mix projections with existing 
reports as input. 
[29,45] 
Endogenous Endo. 
1 
Virtual market clearing assuming zero future 
investments. 
[24,35] 
Endo. 
2 
Virtual market clearing based on an 
endogenously established capacity mix 
projection. The uncertainties of competitors’ 
future investments are exogenous and 
represented via a scenario tree. 
[32]  
Fig. 3. Virtual market clearing simulation.  
10 This assumption is equivalent to the assumption that agents assume perfect 
competition (i.e., all agents are price-takers have perfect information, and 
barriers to entry and exit are small.). 
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
8
approximation, which requires additional calibrations. 
Depending on the problem at hand, one could either use the shadow 
prices directly or could derive price forecasts starting from the capacity 
mix projections. Deriving price forecasts via the capacity mix projections 
allows considering for instance strategic behavior, negotiations for long- 
term bilateral contracts and/or allows increasing the level of granular-
ities by considering different weather years or outage distributions via 
Monte-Carlo simulations. This provides modelers with the flexibility to 
capture behavioral (or other) aspects in the context of the ongoing 
electric power system transition. Fig. 7 illustrates how strategic bidding 
behavior could be captured in the price forecasts. Note that taking 
strategic behavior (e.g. market power) into consideration will poten-
tially result in a different capacity mix projection. Hence, the “genera-
tion expansion planning” does not necessarily have to be a cost- 
minimization optimization problem. One of the alternatives is to use 
MPEC (mathematical programming with equilibrium constraints) for 
capacity mix projection as presented in Ref. [49], though implementing 
an MPEC is beyond the scope of this paper. In the bidding game model, 
each agent could, for instance, use a reinforcement learning algorithm to 
derive its optimal bidding strategy. Via the learning algorithm, agents 
will learn whether they can manipulate prices. This method has been 
proven effective in Ref. [14] to forecast market prices in the context of 
the New Zealand electricity market. A global overview of the long-term 
agent-based model with the proposed investment decision making 
framework and the novel price projection method is shown in Fig. A2 
(Appendix II). 
It is important to recall that the goal of the novel price projection 
method is to enable the agents to base their investment decisions on 
price projections that are (i) theoretically unbiased, (ii) transparent, (iii) 
and can be flexibly generated for a range of possible scenarios (e.g., 
differing in assumptions regarding evolutions of fuel cost, technological 
improvements, and policies). Although out of the scope of this paper, it 
is also important to note that the framework is sufficiently flexible to 
allow considering specific features typical for an agent-based model, 
such as the modeling of behavioral aspects. 
The mathematical formulation of the generation expansion planning 
problem used for price projection or capacity mix projection or both is as 
follows. Since the optimization model will be dispatched frequently in 
the course of the simulation, the optimization model has been formu-
lated in a simple manner to reduce the computational cost. 
3.2.3.1. Objective function. The objective function (Eq. (5)) aims to 
minimize the total system cost: 
min
Gj,y
∑
y
∑
j
(
 
fj,y ⋅Gj,y
)
+
(∑
d
∑
h
Wd ⋅vj,y,d,h ⋅gj,y,d,h ⋅ Δt
))
+
(
VoLL ⋅
∑
y
∑
d
(
Wd ⋅
∑
h
lly,d,h
))
(5) 
The two parts in the objective function represent the cost of elec-
tricity generation and the cost of load loss, respectively. The cost of 
electricity generation consists of fixed costs (see Eq. (2)) and variable 
costs (see Eq. (4)). The cost of load loss is the weighted sum of load loss 
over the entire optimization horizon multiplied by a fixed value of lost 
load (VoLL). 
3.2.3.2. Constraints.  
• Energy balance constraint: for each time step t, the summation of 
generators’ gross output and load loss equals the total demand. 
Fig. 4. Schematic of endogenous price projection methods used in Ref. [35] (a) and [32] (b).  
Fig. 5. Scenario tree deployed to represent the competitors’ expansion [32].  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
9
∑J
j=1
 
gj,y,d,h ⋅ Δt
)
+lly,d,h = Ly,d,h,∀j∈ J,∀y∈ Y,∀d∈ D,∀h∈ H (6)     
• Installed capacity constraint: for each year, the capacity mix is 
updated by adding new investment(s) and subtracting 
decommissioning. 
Gj,y=Gj,y  1+invj,y  1  decj,y  1,∀j∈ J,∀y∈ Y (7)     
• Decommissioning constraint: the decommissioning of technology 
type j in year y is the investment in technology type j in year y-nj, 
where nj is the lifetime of the technology. 
decj,y=invj,y  nj,∀j∈ J,∀y∈ Y (8)    
• Generation limits: the actual power output of each type of technol-
ogy is non-negative and should not exceed the installed capacity of 
the corresponding technology. 
0≤gj,y,d,h ≤ Gj,y,∀j∈ J,∀y∈ Y,∀d∈ D,∀h∈ H (9)  
4. Case study set up 
4.1. Key assumptions and settings of the core long-term agent-based 
model 
Recall that this study aims to effectively assess different price pro-
jection methods. Under the assumption of perfect information and fully 
rational agents as well as deterministic circumstances, a well-calibrated 
agent-based model would be expected to reach (or at least approximate 
very well) the long-run equilibrium. With the goal of benchmarking the 
solution against the long-run equilibrium solution, it is further assumed, 
in addition to the assumptions adopted in Section 3.1.3.3, that all agents 
are fully rational, forward-looking and act as price takers. As shown in 
Fig. 7, this assumption can be relaxed by running the virtual market 
clearing simulation with strategic agents. 
4.2. Configuration of the “exogenous scenarios for future investments” 
price projection method 
As discussed in Section 3.2.2, it is challenging to assign appropriate 
values (both technology distributions and total capacities) for the sce-
narios representing the future investments that will be made by com-
petitors. To study the influence of these expectations, a sensitivity 
analysis is performed in which the exogenously projected investments of 
Fig. 6. Schematic of the novel optimization-based price projection method of each agent.  
Fig. 7. An exemplary illustration of price projection taking strategic behavior into consideration.  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
10
competitors are varied both in terms of the total capacity that is ex-
pected to be added by competitors in future years as well as in terms of 
the distribution of technologies in which competitors are expected to 
invest. In terms of total capacity added, we consider competitors invest 
up to 85%, 90% and 95% of the load peak.11 In terms of the technology 
distribution, three different cases are considered. This leads to a total of 
9 possible cases for the future investments projected to be made by 
competitors. The parametric combinations and the corresponding tags 
of these 9 cases are presented in Table 4. 
5. Results and discussion 
In this section, the simulation results of a long-term agent-based 
model with different price projection methods are compared. Specif-
ically, the following price projection methods are considered:  
i. The “myopic agents” method (as presented in Section 3.2.2). 
ii. The “exogenous scenarios for future investments” method (as pre-
sented in Section 3.2.2).  
iii. The “cost-minimizing future investments” method (as presented in 
Section 3.2.3). 
The potential impacts of these price projection methods on micro- 
agent-level investment decision making algorithms are reflected at the 
macro-system-level capacity mix. Hence, a sensitivity analysis is per-
formed to the corresponding key parameters of different price projection 
methods. As highlighted in Section 3, different price projection methods 
have their respective key parameters:  
i. The look-ahead horizon in the “myopic agents” method and the “cost- 
minimizing future investments” method12  
ii. The values assigned to the scenario tree in the “exogenous scenarios 
for future investments” method13 
Fig. 8 provides an overview of the capacity mix resulting from 
different price projection methods and their corresponding sensitivities. 
The benchmark solution, as discussed in Section 3, for all simulations is 
the long-run equilibrium, which is computed by a generation expansion 
planning model that takes the same input data as the agent-based model. 
The simulation results of the core agent-based model with the three 
price projection methods incorporated are the averaged value of the 
oscillations. As can be observed, the “myopic agents” and “exogenous 
scenarios as future investments” price projection methods are highly 
impacted by their corresponding key parameters. This is reflected by 
the substantially varied macro-system-level capacity mix. The pro-
posed “cost-minimizing future investments” price projection method, on 
the other hand, is shown to systematically approximate the long-run 
equilibrium. The following sections provide a detailed analysis of each 
of the sensitivities considered. 
5.1. Sensitivity analysis on the look-ahead horizon 
The look-ahead horizon is a key micro-agent-level parameter in in-
vestment decision making algorithms since it determines the future in-
formation that is taken into account in agents’ investment decision 
making. A perfectly rational and forward-looking agent would base its 
investment decision on revenue/rent projections within the entire life-
time of the considered investment. Nevertheless, as outlined in Section 
1, heterogeneous agents can have particular perceptions of the infor-
mation and they can be myopic (i.e., have a limited foresight). The look- 
ahead horizon can be adjusted to represent possible short-sightedness of 
agents. Adjustments of the look-ahead horizon thus reflect a way of 
modeling a behavioral aspect. Note that in this work, we aim to establish 
a robust and theoretically unbiased core long-term agent-based model. 
Hence, we neglect behavioral aspects. Note also that the current 
modeling setting has constant fuel prices, technological costs as well as a 
fixed load profile (i.e., the load profile remains constant over different 
years in the simulation). In this setting, an agent-based model should in 
principle be able to approximate the long-run equilibrium on the macro- 
system-level regardless of the micro-level assumptions on the agents’ 
look-ahead horizon. Therefore, under the current case study, we 
consider the robustness of the system capacity mix to changes in the 
look-ahead horizon as an important indicator of investment decision 
robustness. As discussed in Section 3.2.2, the look-ahead horizon is 
particularly important for the “myopic agents” price projection method, 
as the share of future investments in the future capacity mix grows when 
looking further into the future. 
As shown in Fig. 8, the simulation results are highly sensitive to 
different look-ahead horizons when using the “myopic agents” price 
projection method. More specifically, the overinvestment grows larger 
as the look-ahead horizon becomes longer. Peak-load technology ac-
counts for most of the overinvestment. The simulation results of the 
agent-based model with the “cost-minimizing future investments” price 
projection method are more robust under different look-ahead horizons 
and systematically approximate the equilibrium solution very well. This 
indicates that the core long-term agent-based model, with investment 
decision making algorithm integrated, can serve as an ideal theoretical 
benchmark for further extension of the model. 
The results in Fig. 8 also show that using the “myopic agents” price 
projection method with a 5-year look-ahead horizon can approximate 
the long-run equilibrium. The reason is that using a 5-year look-ahead 
horizon means that the agents base their investment decisions only on 
the system status in the first milestone year, thus the observed scarcity is 
the recent decommissioning and no future information is considered. In 
a perfectly competitive market, the profit-maximizing agents will make 
investment decisions that fill the gap in a system cost-minimizing 
manner. 
To shed light on why the model is sensitive to the parameter look- 
ahead horizon, we take the case where agents are assumed to have the 
longest look-ahead horizon (20 years or the lifetime of the technologies) 
as an example. Recall that every fifth year is a milestone year, meaning 
20 years comprise 4 milestone years. With different price projection 
Table 4 
Parameters considered for the expansion scenario tree.   
Distribution (Base/Mid/Peak) 
Competitors’ total expansion 0.2/0.5/0.3 0.3/0.2/0.5 0.5/0.3/0.2 
0.95 (a) (b) (c) 
0.9 (d) (e) (f) 
0.85 (g) (h) (i)  
11 In Ref. [32], this parameter is 95% and a sensitivity analysis is performed by 
reducing this parameter to 90%. However, an agent-level annual investment 
cap restricts the development of the system capacity. Hence, to dissect the in-
fluence of this parameter, we remove the agent-level investment cap and 
further reduce this parameter to 85%. If this parameter is 100%, resulting 
system capacity mix will be empty because all agents are expecting other agents 
to completely fulfil the demand.  
12 Scenario tree is not part of the “cost-minimizing future investments” method, 
while this method still preserves the parameter look-ahead horizon. 
13 Note that the look-ahead horizon, yet uncritical, also exists in the “exoge-
nous scenarios for future investments” method. Further note that, as discussed in 
Section 3.2.2, although the impact of the competitors’ total expansion param-
eter is amplified by the total number of agents and we keep the total number of 
agents constant in this study, similar studies can be carried out by keeping the 
competitors’ total expansion constant and varying the total number of agents. 
Nevertheless, the total number of agents, in specific case studies, should be 
determined by the system one considers. 
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
11
methods, the capacity mix projections of the first agent that is making an 
investment decision in the first investment round during a typical 
milestone year are plotted in Fig. 9. 
When agents make investment decisions assuming that no new in-
vestments will happen, as shown in Fig. 9a, the first agent in the first 
investment round will sense zero announced investment (as there is no 
preceding investment in this milestone year). In combination with the 
fact that all existing capacities will be decommissioned after three 
milestone years (or after 15 years), as the youngest existing capacities 
are the investments placed in the previous milestone year, being 5 years 
ago. This leads to a huge projected lack of capacity in the fourth mile-
stone year, even though over-capacities already exist in the first mile-
stone year. In the virtual market clearing, this lack of capacity is 
translated into electricity price projections corresponding to the price 
cap for the entire year, which is obviously not realistic. The projected 
high prices towards the end of the look-ahead period incentivize in-
vestments until the point that the future supply gap is almost filled. In 
addition, expecting supply gaps and corresponding high electricity pri-
ces only in the last 5 years means the considered investment option tends 
to be dispatched mainly in this period. Given this low number of pro-
jected operating hours, the technology with the lowest fixed cost is 
favored, which explains why peak load technology accounts for most of 
the overinvestment. 
A number of measures can be taken to avoid or mitigate this over-
investment problem. For instance, one could force the agents to be 
myopic (which is used in Ref. [24,35]) or impose an agent-level annual 
investment cap (which is used in Ref. [32]). One could also consider 
adjusting the projected electricity prices, for instance by reducing the 
high prices observed towards the end of the look-ahead horizon. How-
ever, requiring agents to behave myopically to forcibly correct unin-
tended simulation results reduces the applicability of the model (that is, 
only myopic investment behavior can be considered). Moreover, 
although introducing corrective actions such as investment caps or price 
adjustments does allow considering longer look-ahead horizons, it leads 
to secondary problems (What is a reasonable investment limit? What 
would be appropriate electricity prices at the end of the look-ahead 
horizon?) and assumptions that both might require further rectifica-
tion and reduce transparency. 
Fig. 9b illustrates the capacity mix foreseen by agents with the “cost- 
minimizing future investments” price projection method. In such a case, 
the agents have the abilities to both establish expectations on future 
investments and keep these expectations according to the intrinsic 
characteristic of the system. Furthermore, the look-ahead horizon is no 
longer affecting the investment decisions as the investment is no longer 
incentivized by the unrealistic high electricity prices that arise only in 
the last milestone year, but rather by the homogeneously distributed 
electricity prices over the entire look-ahead horizon. 
5.2. Sensitivity analysis on the values assigned to the scenario tree in the 
“exogenous scenarios for future investments” price projection method 
On micro-agent-level, the expectations of agents about competitors’ 
expansion plan directly affect their investment decisions by altering the 
projections of future electricity prices. These affected investment de-
cisions will ultimately be reflected on the macro-system-level in the form 
of capacity mix variations. Fig. 10 shows the resulting system capacity 
mixes for different cases of the competitors’ expansion projections (see 
Section 4.2 for a detailed description of these cases). The resulting 
macro-system-level capacity mix for each case is shown in Fig. 10 and 
summarized in Table 5. 
Overall, one can observe that the simulation results vary largely 
depending on the exogenous inputs used. First, by comparing the system 
capacity mix for different expectations regarding the total capacity 
projected to be added by competitors in the future (comparing the 
different capacity mix groups in Fig. 10), one can observe that 
decreasing the expectation on competitors’ total expansion (from 95% 
to 90% and 85%) leads to a substantial increase in the total system ca-
pacity and vice versa. On the one hand, low expectations on competi-
tors’ total expansion lead to unrealistic high prices in the future and 
these high electricity prices trigger investments until the future supply 
Fig. 8. Overview of the impact of key parameters of different price projection methods on the resulting system capacity. The considered price projection methods are 
described in Section 3.2 and the corresponding pathways to equilibrium are illustrated in Fig. A3. The cases considered for the “exogenous scenarios for future in-
vestments” method are presented in Table 4. 
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
12
gaps are filled. On the other hand, high expectations on competitors’ 
total expansion squeeze the investments of all agents and lead to un-
derinvestment, i.e., all of the agents lack of an investment incentive 
because they overestimated competitors’ future investments. 
Second, by comparing the different projections of the technology 
distribution of the future investments by competitors (comparing the 
capacity mixes within each group in Fig. 10), it can be seen that the 
assumed technology distribution can result in a considerable change in 
the system capacity mix. More specifically, the more a certain type of 
technology is expected to be invested in by competitors, the less the 
agents will invest in this technology, and vice versa. Consider the Group 
1 of Fig. 10 as an example. As the expected proportion of future in-
vestments in peak-load technology increases from 20% to 30% and 50%, 
the proportion of peak-load technology in the simulation results de-
creases from 40.8% to 36% and 22.7%, respectively. A similar trend also 
holds for investments in base-load technologies. For mid-load technol-
ogies, it is more complicated as the economic potential for investments 
in mid-load technologies is also strongly impacted by the projected in-
vestments in base-load and peak-load technologies. 
Additionally, one can also find that as the projected total capacity 
installed by competitors in future years decreases (inter-Group), the 
technology distribution of the projected investments by competitors 
(intra-Group) has a smaller impact on the resulting system capacity mix. 
This is primarily because the influence of these expectations tends to be 
weaker as the expected investments become less. At the same time, as 
the projected competitors’ investment becomes less (inter-Group), the 
driving factor switches from technology distribution to the total capacity 
added. And as a result, the macro-system-level capacity mixes tend to 
resemble each other. In fact, in the extreme condition (with the total 
expansion expectation reduced to zero), these capacity mixes converge 
to those of the “myopic agents” method. 
Moreover, although different capacity distribution parameters 
change the capacity mix, the total amount of capacity remains constant 
within one total expansion level setting. That is, the total amount of 
Fig. 9. Capacity mix projections of the first agent that is making an investment decision in the first investment round during a typical milestone year.  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
13
installed capacity is completely driven by the setting of the expected 
total amount of competitors’ expansion, instead of the intrinsic char-
acteristics of the model. 
5.3. Implications and limitations 
The analysis above suggests that the assumptions adopted by in-
vestment decision making algorithms (on agent level) can highly impact 
the simulation results on system level. Specifically, the system capacity 
mix is highly sensitive to the parameter look-ahead horizon when the 
“myopic agents” price projection method is used. This is due to that this 
method implicitly assumes no new investment will happen in the future 
and therefore a supply gap will arise, which triggers new investments in 
the agents’ located milestone year (i.e. milestone year 1) to compensate 
for the unrealistic under-capacity in the further future. Examination on 
“exogenous scenarios for future investments” price projection method 
shows that, the values assigned to the scenario tree regarding competi-
tors’ investments (on agent level) is dominating the simulation results 
on the system level. Overall, the two layers on the scenarios tree govern 
different aspects of the simulation results: the total amount of installed 
capacity is driven by the expectation on competitors’ total investment, 
and the share of different types of technologies are mainly influenced by 
the second layer of the scenario tree (i.e. how competitors’ new in-
vestments are distributed among candidate technologies). As we have 
shown, our proposed “cost-minimizing future investments” price projection 
method requires less exogenous parameters (i.e. scenario tree) and is 
more robust to the parameter look-ahead horizon. 
The newly proposed price projection and the analysis performed in 
this study, however, do have several limitations. From a methodological 
viewpoint, using the resulting output from a generation expansion 
planning problem to guide investment decision making implicitly as-
sumes that the agents are expecting the capacity mix to evolve in a cost- 
minimizing manner. The electricity market, in reality, is more compli-
cated. For example, strategic investment behavior or market 
imperfections can result in deviations from the perfect market outcome. 
One of the alternatives is to consider the MPEC (mathematical pro-
gramming with equilibrium constraints) formulation of a generation 
expansion planning problem, which allows the inclusion of strategic 
investment behaviors, as presented in Ref. [49]. Moreover, note that the 
analysis is performed in a highly stylized electric power system where 
the agents are stripped of distinctive features such as behavioral factors. 
In reality, there exist many behavioral factors that influence investment 
decision making. Accounting for these factors can deviate the results 
from the perfect market outcomes and can mitigate the impact of the 
existing price projection methods’ underlying assumptions on model 
outcomes. For instance, employing risk-averse agents can reduce the 
sensitivity of the parameter look-ahead horizon because the unrealistic 
profit in the distant future is subject to a very high discount rate. Hence, 
the existing price projection methods, if adequately parameterized, can 
also approximate empirical results. 
6. Conclusion 
This paper reviewed different investment decision making algo-
rithms adopted in long-term agent-based electric power system simu-
lation models. Furthermore, this paper compared three endogenous 
investment decision making algorithms by benchmarking against the 
long-run equilibrium. More specifically, sensitivity analyses on the as-
sumptions adopted by the two existing investment algorithms have been 
carried out and compared with a novel investment decision making 
algorithm. 
Simulation results show that, in an isolated electricity market with 
highly stylized modeling settings, the investment decisions made by 
existing investment algorithms are highly sensitive to assumptions 
regarding certain parameters of the investment decision making algo-
rithms. Due to the difficulties to properly calibrate these values, the 
credibility and transparency of simulation results can be influenced by 
the selection of key parameters. Therefore, it is of great importance for 
Fig. 10. System capacity mix with different competitors’ expansion projections.  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
14
modelers to be well aware of the influences imposed by these assump-
tions and key parameters. 
Further analysis has shown that the core agent-based model – with 
the proposed micro-agent-level “cost-minimizing future investments” 
price projection method adopted – is robust and more transparent in the 
theoretical modeling settings used in this study. This core agent-based 
model, with the proposed price projection method integrated, enables 
agent-based modelers to mitigate the potential impacts of implicit as-
sumptions (related to modeling specific behavioral aspects) and the in-
fluence of control variables (e.g., policy instruments), thereby paving 
the road towards transparent, unbiased, and robust long-term agent- 
based electric power system simulation models. 
In light of the results we have presented, future work will focus on 
developing more elaborated investment decision making algorithms. It 
is of particular interest to consider risk-averse investment decision 
making under uncertainty and market imperfections. The uncertainties 
include but are not limited to load growth uncertainties, fuel price un-
certainties, and policy uncertainties. The model will then be able to map 
from these uncertainties to price projection uncertainties, which calls for 
a stochastic generation expansion planning problem to generate a price 
projection distribution. Furthermore, future work will incorporate 
renewable energy sources into the modeling framework. To do so, both 
the NPV calculation and the price projection method have to be 
improved. On the one hand, regarding the NPV calculation, revenues 
from renewable support schemes should be further considered in addi-
tion to the fixed costs, variable costs and day-ahead market revenues. On 
the other hand, the optimization problem will have to consider endog-
enously the impact of renewable support schemes. For instance, an in-
vestment subsidy can be modelled as a linear fixed revenue at each year 
for each type of renewable technology, this can be a one-off payment or 
payments that spread over several years, whereas a market-based sup-
port scheme (e.g. green certificates market), requires additional con-
straints to couple with the day-ahead market in a two-stage optimization 
problem. These future improvements to the agent-based modeling 
framework will be tested in a specific case study. An interesting case 
study, where the impact of the incorporation of renewable energy 
sources, agents’ decision-making under uncertainty, and market im-
perfections on models results could be demonstrated, it is the analysis of 
the Belgian nuclear phase-out. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
This research received funding from Fonds Wetenschappelijk 
Onderzoek (FWO) with grant number S006718N, and the Belgium 
Federal Public Service Economy, Energietransitiefonds, Neptune 
project.  
Appendix I. Reduced load duration curve in contrast with the original load duration curve
Fig. A1. Reduced load duration curve in contrast with the original load duration curve.  
Table 5 
Amount of different technologies in the capacity mixes (unit: MW).   
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 
Technology (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) 
Base-load 7473 7307 6493 8000 7967 8000 7933 7933 7933 
Mid-load 207 1967 607 3280 3747 2947 3847 3953 3787 
Peak-Load 4320 2727 4900 10720 10287 11053 18220 18113 18280 
Total 12000 12001 12000 22000 22001 22000 30000 29999 30000  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
15
Appendix II. Flow diagram of the agent-based model  
Fig. A2. Overview of the agent-based model with the novel price projection method embedded into investment processes.   
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
16
Appendix III. The pathway to equilibrium (of the cases shown in Fig. 8)  
Fig. A3. The pathway to equilibrium (of the cases shown in Fig. 8).  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
17
Credit author statement 
Zhenmin Tao: Conceptualization, Software, Writing - original draft. Jorge A. Moncada: Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing- Review & Editing. 
Kris Poncelet: Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing- Review & Editing. Erik Delarue: Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing- Review & Editing. 
References 
[1] Skea J, Nishioka S. Policies and practices for a low-carbon society. Clim Policy 
2008;8:S5–16. https://doi.org/10.3763/cpol.2008.0487. 
[2] Li FGN. Actors behaving badly: Exploring the modelling of non-optimal behaviour 
in energy transitions. Energy Strateg Rev 2017;15:57–71. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.esr.2017.01.002. 
[3] Li FGN, Trutnevyte E, Strachan N. A review of socio-technical energy transition 
(STET) models. Technol Forecast Soc Change 2015;100:290–305. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.techfore.2015.07.017. 
[4] Li FGN, Strachan N. Modelling energy transitions for climate targets under 
landscape and actor inertia. Environ Innov SocTransitions 2017;24:106–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2016.08.002. 
Fig. A3. (continued).  
Z. Tao et al.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021) 110405
18
[5] Masini A, Menichetti E. The impact of behavioural factors in the renewable energy 
investment decision making process: Conceptual framework and empirical 
findings. Energy Pol 2012;40(1):28–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enpol.2010.06.062. 
[6] Masini A, Menichetti E. Investment decisions in the renewable energy sector: An 
analysis of non-financial drivers. Technol Forecast Soc Change 2013;80(3):510–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.08.003. 
[7] Bergek A, Mignon I, Sundberg G. Who invests in renewable electricity production? 
Empirical evidence and suggestions for further research. Energy Pol 2013;56: 
568–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.01.038. 
[8] Bale CSE, Varga L, Foxon TJ. Energy and complexity: new ways forward. Appl 
Energy 2015;138:150–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.10.057. 
[9] Allcott H, Mullainathan S. Behavior and energy policy. Science 2010;327(5970): 
1204–5. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1180775. 
[10] Bower J, Bunn DW. Model-based comparisons of pool and bilateral markets for 
electricity. Energy J 2000;21(3):1–29. 
[11] Bunn DW, Oliveira FS. Agent-based simulation - an application to the new 
electricity trading arrangements of England and Wales. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 
2001;5(5):493–503. 
[12] Sun J, Tesfatsion L. Dynamic testing of wholesale power market designs: an open- 
source agent-based framework. Comput Econ 2007;30(3):291–327. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10614-007-9095-1. 
[13] Maenhoudt M. Strategic behaviour in power wholesale electricity markets - design, 
implementation & validation of an agent-based simulation platform. Leuven: KU 
Leuven; 2014. 
[14] Young D, Poletti S, Browne O. Can agent-based models forecast spot prices in 
electricity markets? Evidence from the New Zealand electricity market. Energy 
Econ 2014;45:419–34. 
[15] Ernst D, Minoia A, Ilic M. Market dynamics driven by the decision-making power 
producers. In: Proceedings of 2004 IREP symposium-bulk power system dynamics 
and control-VI. IEEE; 2004. p. 1–6. 
[16] Bagnall AJ, Smith GD. A multiagent model of the UK market in electricity 
generation. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 2005;9(5):522–36. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TEVC.2005.850264. 
[17] Zheng M, Meinrenken CJ, Lackner KS. Agent-based model for electricity 
consumption and storage to evaluate economic viability of tariff arbitrage for 
residential sector demand response. Appl Energy 2014;126:297–306. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.04.022. 
[18] Iychettira KK, Hakvoort RA, Linares P, de Jeu R. Towards a comprehensive policy 
for electricity from renewable energy: designing for social welfare. Appl Energy 
2017;187:228–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.035. 
[19] Sensfuss F, Ragwitz M, Genoese M. Simulating the expansion of renewable 
electricity generation in Germany-An Agent-Based Approach. In: Proceedings of 
the 29th IAEE international conference; 2006. p. 1–11. 
[20] Bublitz A, Renz L, Keles D, Genoese M, Fichtner W. An assessment of the newly 
proposed strategic reserve in Germany. In: International conference on the 
European energy market. EEM; 2015. p. 1–5. 
[21] Bhagwat PC, Iychettira KK, Richstein JC, Chappin EJL, De Vries LJ. The 
effectiveness of capacity markets in the presence of a high portfolio share of 
renewable energy sources. Util Pol 2017;48:76–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jup.2017.09.003. 
[22] Bhagwat PC, Richstein JC, Chappin EJL, Iychettira KK, De Vries LJ. Cross-border 
effects of capacity mechanisms in interconnected power systems. Util Pol 2017;46: 
33–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jup.2017.03.005. 
[23] Richstein JC. Interactions between carbon and power markets in transition. Delft: 
TU Delft; 2015. https://doi.org/10.4233/uuid:0e1dcc59-40f0-4ff9-a330- 
c185fdfca119. 
[24] Chen H, Wang C, Cai W, Wang J. Simulating the impact of investment preference 
on low-carbon transition in power sector. Appl Energy 2018;217:440–55. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.02.152. 
[25] de Vries L, Heijnen P. The impact of electricity market design upon investment 
under uncertainty: the effectiveness of capacity mechanisms. Util Pol 2008;16: 
215–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jup.2007.12.002. 
[26] Weidlich A, Veit D. A critical survey of agent-based wholesale electricity market 
models. Energy Econ 2008;30:1728–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eneco.2008.01.003. 
[27] Ringler P, Keles D, Fichtner W. Agent-based modelling and simulation of smart 
electricity grids and markets - a literature review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016; 
57:205–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.169. 
[28] Richstein JC, Chappin EJL, de Vries LJ. Cross-border electricity market effects due 
to price caps in an emission trading system: an agent-based approach. Energy Pol 
2014;71:139–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2014.03.037. 
[29] Genoese M, Genoese F, Fichtner W. Model-based analysis of the impact of capacity 
markets on electricity markets. In: 9th international conference on the European 
energy market, EEM, vol. 12; 2012. p. 1–6. 
[30] Sensfuß F, Genoese M. Agent-based simulation of the German electricity markets: 
an analysis of the German spot market prices in the year 2001. In: 9th Symposium 
energieinnovation kurzfassungsband: dritte energiepreiskrise. Anforderungen an 
die Energieinnovation; 2006. p. 1–12. 
[31] Reeg M, et al. AMIRIS - an agent-based simulation model for the analysis of 
different support schemes and their effects on actors involved in the integration of 
renewable energies into energy markets. In: 23rd International workshop on 
database and expert systems applications. DEXA; 2012. p. 339–44. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/DEXA.2012.54. 
[32] Botterud A, Mahalik MR, Veselka TD, Ryu H-S, Sohn K-W. Multi-agent simulation 
of generation expansion in electricity markets. In: 2007 IEEE power engineering 
society general meeting. IEEE; 2007. p. 1–8. 
[33] North M, Conzelmann G, Koritarov V, Macal C, Thimmapuram P, Veselka T. E- 
laboratories: agent-based modeling of electricity markets. In: American power 
conference; 2002. p. 1–19. 
[34] Chappin EJL, de Vries LJ, Richstein JC, Bhagwat P, Iychettira K, Khan S. Simulating 
climate and energy policy with agent-based modelling: the Energy Modelling 
Laboratory (EMLab). Environ Model Software 2017;96:421–31. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.07.009. 
[35] De Vries LJ, Chappin EJL, Richstein JC. EMLab-Generation – an experimentation 
environment for electricity policy analysis. Delft: TU Delft; 2015. 
[36] Sensfuß F, Ragwitz M, Genoese M. The merit-order effect: a detailed analysis of the 
price effect of renewable electricity generation on spot market prices in Germany. 
Energy Pol 2008;36(8):3076–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2008.03.035. 
[37] Weidlich A, Sensfuß F, Genoese M, Veit D. Studying the effects of CO2 emissions 
trading on the electricity market: a multi-agent-based approach. In: Emissions 
trading. New York: Springer Science+Business Media; 2011. p. 91–101. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-73653-2_6. 
[38] Ghosh DP, Luh PB. Analysis and simulation of payment cost minimization and bid 
cost minimization with strategic bidders. In: IEEE/PES power systems conference 
and exposition, PSCE 2011. IEEE; 2011. p. 1–4. 
[39] Fekete K, Knezevic G, Nikolovski S, Slipac G. Influence of cross-border energy 
trading on prices of electricity in Croatia. In: 6th international conference on the 
European energy market, EEM 2009. IEEE; 2009. p. 1–6. 
[40] Lopes F, Algarvio H, Coelho H. Agent-based simulation of retail electricity markets: 
bilateral trading players. In: 24th International workshop on database and expert 
systems applications. DEXA; 2013. p. 189–93. 
[41] Grimm V, et al. A standard protocol for describing individual-based and agent- 
based models. Ecol Model 2006;198:115–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ecolmodel.2006.04.023. 
[42] Poncelet K, Van Stiphout A, Meus J, Delarue E. W. D, ‘LUSYM Invest : a generation 
expansion planning model with a high level of temporal and technical detail’. 
2018. Leuven. 
[43] Poncelet K, Delarue E, William D. Unit commitment constraints in long-term 
planning models : relevance , pitfalls and the role of assumptions on flexibility. 
Appl Energy 2020;258. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113843. 
[44] Schr¨oder A, Kunz F, Meiss J, Mendelevitch R, von Hirschhausen C. Current and 
Prospective Costs of Electricity Generation until 2050. DIW Berlin; 2013. Berlin. 
[45] Bublitz A, Ringler P, Genoese M, Keles D, Fichtner W. Agent-based simulation of 
interrelated wholesale electricity markets. In: 25th International workshop on 
database and expert systems applications. DEXA; 2014. p. 103–8. 
[46] Philippo L. Design of an agent-based model for simulating investments in the 
electricity market. Leuven: KU Leuven; 2017. 
[47] Wüstenhagen R, Menichetti E. Strategic choices for renewable energy investment: 
conceptual framework and opportunities for further research. Energy Pol 2012;40: 
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.06.050. 
[48] Fagiani R, Barquín J, Hakvoort R. Risk-based assessment of the cost-efficiency and 
the effectivity of renewable energy support schemes: certificate markets versus 
feed-in tariffs. Energy Pol 2013;55:648–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enpol.2012.12.066. 
[49] Kwon J, Zhou Z, Levin T, Botterud A. Resource Adequacy in Electricity Markets 
With Renewable Energy. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems. 35; Jan. 2020. 
p. 773–81. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2019.2930934. no. 1. 
[50] T¨opfer K, Adigbli P, Arnault M. Direktvermarktung von erneuerbaren Energien an 
der Stromb¨orse - ein deutsch-franz¨osischer Erfahrungsbericht zur Marktintegration 
von erneuerbaren Energien. DFBEW; 2017. 
[51] Andriy B. The hundred-page machine learning book. Middletown: Andriy Burkov; 
2019. 
[52] Raven BH. Social influence and power. 1964. California, USA. 
Z. Tao et al.
