Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 20 (2013) 335–346 335
DOI 10.3233/ICA-130438
IOS Press
Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An
agent-based simulator with game theory for
scenario analysis
Tiago Pinto, Isabel Praça, Zita V ale∗, Hugo Morais and Tiago M. Sousa
GECAD – Knowledge Engineering and Decision Support Research Centre – Polytechnic of Porto, Rua Dr . António
Bernardino de Almeida, Porto, Portugal
Abstract. Electricity markets are complex environments, involving a large number of different entities, with speciﬁc character-
istics and objectives, making their decisions and interacting in a dynamic scene. Game-theory has been widely used to support
decisions in competitive environments; therefore its application in electricity markets can prove to be a high potential tool. This
paper proposes a new scenario analysis algorithm, which includes the application of game-theory, to evaluate and preview dif-
ferent scenarios and provide players with the ability to strategi cally react in order to exhibit the behavior that better ﬁts their
objectives. This model includes forecasts of competitor players’ actions, to build models of their behavior, in order to deﬁne the
most probable expected scenarios. Once the scenarios are deﬁned, game theory is applied to support the choice of the action
to be performed. Our use of game theory is intended for suppor ting one speciﬁc agent and not fo r achieving the equilibrium in
the market. MASCEM (Multi-Agent System for Competitive Electricity Markets) is a multi-agent electricity market simulator
that models market players and simulates their operation in the market. The scenario analysis algorithm has been tested within
MASCEM and our experimental ﬁndings with a case study based on real data from the Iberian Electricity Market are presented
and discussed.
Keywords: Decision making, electricity markets, intelligent agents, game theory, multiagent systems, scenario analysis
1. Introduction
All over the world electricity restructuring placed
several challenges to governments and to the com-
panies that are involved in generation, transmission
and distribution of electrical energy. Potential beneﬁts,
however, depend on the efﬁcient operation of the mar-
ket. The deﬁnition of the market structure implies a set
of complex rules and regulations that should prevent
strategic behaviors [31]. Several market models exists,
with different rules and performances creating the need
to foresee market behavior, regulators want to test the
∗Corresponding author: Zita V ale is with GECAD, Knowledge
Engineering and Decision-Support Research Group of the School of
Engineering, Polytechnic Institute of Porto (ISEP/IPP), Rua Dr. An-
tónio Bernardino de Almeida, 431, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal. Tel.:
+351 228 340 511; Fax: +351 228 321 159; E-mail: zav@isep.ipp.pt.
rules before they are implemented and market players
need to understand the market so they may reap the
beneﬁts of a well-planned action [3,21].
Usually, electricity market players use rather simple
strategic behaviors. Most entities keep their biddings
constant along the time, while others base their pro-
posed prices in the generation costs of their installa-
tions. The most elaborated strategic behaviors go no
further than performing simple averages or regressions
of the historic market prices. This matter, a highly
unexplored and unimplemented issue, of huge impor-
tance for the maximization of players proﬁts, supports
the need for the development of proper market acting
strategies.
The main contribution of this work is to comple-
ment the Multi-Agent Simulator for Electricity Mar-
kets (MASCEM) [26,33] simulator. MASCEM is a
modeling and simulation tool that has been developed
ISSN 1069-2509/13/$27.50 c© 2013 – IOS Press and the author(s). All rights reserved

336 T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis
by this team for the purpose of studying complex re-
structured electricity ma rkets operation. MASCEM’s
ability to model the most relevant market players and
negotiation mechanisms provides the means for an ad-
equate development and study of models and tech-
niques to support market players’ actions in the best
possible way. It provides market players with simula-
tion and decision-support resources, being able to give
them competitive advantage in the market.
The contribution is provided through the develop-
ment of a new computational model, implemented to
support the development of dynamic pricing strategies,
taking advantage of the interactive environment be-
tween market agents and on the gathered knowledge
during market participation. The methodology is char-
acterized as a scenario analysis algorithm able to sup-
port players’ strategic behavior. The proposed model
includes four innovative components which arise as
separate, however, complementary contributions: (i)
scenarios deﬁnition, concer ning the automatic creation
of distinct market scenarios based on different perspec-
tives and potential states of the electricity market evo-
lution along the time; (ii) players proﬁles deﬁnition,
which is an independent computational model directed
to the creation of competitor players’ models, in what
concerns their characteristics and expected behavior,
performing analysis and forecasts of their current and
past observed actions and continuously gathered infor-
mation; (iii) possible actions deﬁnition, aiming at es-
tablishing a set of coherent and realistic possibilities of
actions for the supported player to take on an electric-
ity market environment, taking into account each cur-
rent context (concerning market and competitor play-
ers’ states at each point in time); (iv) adaptation of
the game-theory concept [6, 23] to the electricity mar-
ket negotiation environment, both concerning bi-lateral
and multi-lateral negotiations, which is a major contri-
bution by itself, in a sense that this adaptation concerns
such a dynamic and speciﬁc context, with so many par-
ticularities and constraints. Notice however, that the
use of game theory is to support the decisions of the
agents and not to reach equilibrium in the market.
After this introductory section, Section 2 introduces
the theme of multi-agent simulation in electricity mar-
kets, outlining the main features of MASCEM, pro-
viding an essential insight of this simulator, contribut-
ing to an adequate understanding of the simulated
multi-agent environment, in order to properly expose
the advantages of the proposed work; Section 3 ex-
plores the proposed computational model, including
the game theory approach fo r scenario analysis; Sec-
tion 4 presents a case study based on real electricity
market data, testing the proposed models and compar-
ing its results with the results for the same scenario us-
ing other two well established methodologies for deci-
sion support of players acting in electricity markets. Fi-
nally Section 5 presents the most relevant conclusions
and contributions of this paper.
2. Multi-agent simulation of competitive electricity
markets
Simulation tools are very suitable to ﬁnd market in-
efﬁciencies or to provide support for market players’
decision. Multi-agent based simulation is particularly
well ﬁtted to analyze dynamic and adaptive systems
with complex interactions among constituents [2,7,8,
15,22,27,29]. With multi-agent simulation tools the in-
dividual behaviors may be studied, as well as the sys-
tem behavior and how the individual behaviors may af-
fect its performance. Another very relevant issue is that
the multi-agent model may be dynamically enlarged to
accomplish new rules o r participants.
Indeed several multi-agent tools have been fruitfully
applied to the study of restructured wholesale power
markets [2,8,19,20,26,27]. Some of the most relevant
tools in this domain are the Electricity Market Com-
plex Adaptive System (EMCAS) [19] and Agent-based
Modelling of Electricity Systems (AMES) [20].
Within EMCAS software agents have negotiation
competences and use strategies based on machine-
learning and adaptation to s imulate Electricity Mar-
kets. AMES is an open-source computational labora-
tory for studying wholesale power markets, restruc-
tured in accordance with U.S. Federal Energy Regu-
latory Commission (FERC). It uses an agent-base test
bed with strategically learning electric power traders
to experimentally test the extent to which commonly
used seller market power and market efﬁciency mea-
sures are informative for restructured wholesale power
markets.
MASCEM was presented to the scientiﬁc commu-
nity in 2003 [26], combining agent based-modeling
and simulation. In its initial form MASCEM provided
the modeling of the most relevant entities that partici-
pate in electricity markets, as well as some of the most
common market mechanism found worldwide. One of
MASCEM’s objectives is to be able to simulate as
many market models and players types as possible so
it can reproduce in a realistic way the operation of real
electricity markets. This enables it to be used as a simu-

T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis 337
lation and decision-support tool for short/medium term
purposes but also as a tool to support long-term deci-
sions, such as the ones taken by regulators. MASCEM
includes several negotiation mechanisms usually found
in electricity markets [30]. It can simulate several types
of markets, namely: day-ahead markets, bilateral con-
tracts, balancing markets and forward markets. This
implies that each agent must decide whether to, and
how to, participate in each market type.
In 2011 a new enhanced version of MASCEM
arose [33], where agents use several distinct strategies
when negotiating in the market and learning mecha-
nisms in order to best fulﬁll their objectives. Although
MASCEM’s purpose is not to explicitly search for
equilibrium points, but to help understand the complex
and aggregate system behaviors that emerge from the
interactions of heterogeneous individuals, agents learn
and adapt their strategies during a simulation, thus pos-
sibly converging toward equilibrium.
There are also several entities involved in the nego-
tiations in the scope of electricity markets; MASCEM
multi-agent model represents all the involved entities
and their relationships. MASCEM model includes: a
Market Facilitator Agent, Seller Agents, Buyer Agents,
Virtual Power Producer (VPP) [34] Agents, VPP Facil-
itator Agents, a Market Operator Agent and a System
Operator Agent.
2.1. MASCEM strategies for competitor players
proﬁles deﬁnition
In order to build suitable proﬁles of competitor
agents, it is essential to provide players with strate-
gies capable of dealing with the constant changes in
competitors’ behavior, allowing adaptation to their ac-
tions and reactions. For that, it is necessary to have
adequate forecasting techniques to analyze the data
properly, namely the historic of other agents past ac-
tions. The way each agent bid is predicted can be ap-
proached in several ways, namely through the use of
statistical methods, data mining techniques [9,28,32],
neural networks (NN) [1,14], support vector machines
(SVM) [35], or several other methods [5,13,16,17].
But since the other agents can be gifted with intelli-
gent behavior as well, and able to adapt to the circum-
stances, there is no method that can be said to be the
best for every situation, only the best for one or other
particular case.
To take advantage of the best characteristics of each
technique, we decided to create a method that inte-
grates several distinct technologies and approaches.
The method consists of the use of several forecast-
ing algorithms, all providing their predictions, and, on
top of that, a reinforcement learning algorithm that
chooses the one that is most likely to present the best
answer. This choice is done according to the past expe-
rience of their responses and also to the present char-
acteristics of each situation, such as the week day, the
period, and the particular market context in which the
players are acting.
The main reinforcement algorithm presents a dis-
tinct set of statistics for each acting agent, for their ac-
tions to be predicted independently from each other,
and also for each period. This means that an algorithm
that may be presenting good results for a certain agent
in a given period, with its output chosen more often
when bidding for this period, may possibly never be
chosen as the answer for another period. The tenden-
cies observed when looking at the historic of negotia-
tion periods independently from each other show that
they vary much from each other, what suggests that
distinct algorithms can present distinct levels of results
when dealing with such different tendencies.
All forecasting algorithms may be weighted to de-
ﬁne its importance to the system. This means that a
strategy that has a higher weight value will detach
faster from the rest in case of either success or failure.
The way the statistics are updated, and consequently
the best answer chosen, can be deﬁned by the user.
MASCEM provides three alte rnative reinforcement
learning algorithms, all having in common the starting
point. All the algorithms start with the same value of
conﬁdence, and then, according to their particular per-
formance, that value is updated.
The three algorithms are: a simple reinforcement
learning algorithm; the revised Roth-Erev reinforce-
ment learning algorithm; and a learning algorithm
based on the Bayes theorem of probability. These three
algorithms are detailed in [33].
Concerning the simple reinforcement learning algo-
rithm, the updating of the values is done through a di-
rect decrement of the conﬁdence value C in the time
t, according to the absolute value of the difference be-
tween the prediction P and the real value R. The up-
dating of the values is expressed by Eq. (1).
Ct+1 = Ct −| (R−P )| (1)
The revised Roth-Erev reinforcement learning algo-
rithm [17], besides the features of the previous algo-
rithm, also includes a weight value W , ranging from 0
to 1, for the deﬁnition of the importance of past expe-
riences. This version is expressed as in Eq. (2).

338 T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis
Ct+1 = Ct ×W −| (R−P )|× (1−W ) (2)
In the learning algorithm based on the Bayes theorem
of probability [10], the updating of the values is done
through the propagation o f the probability of each al-
gorithm being successful given the facts of its past per-
formance. The expected utility, or expected success of
each algorithm is given by Eq. (3), being E the avail-
able evidences, A an action with possible outcomes
Oi, U (Oi|A) the utility of each of the outcome states
given that action A is taken, P (Oi|E,A ) the condi-
tional probability distribution over the possible out-
come states, given that evidence E is observed and ac-
tion A taken.
EU (A|E)=
∑
i
P (Oi|E,A )×U (Oi|A) (3)
The algorithms used for the predictions are based on
neural networks, several statistical approaches, pattern
analysis, history matching, second-guessing and self
model predictions.
One of the algorithms is based on a feed-forward
neural network trained with the historic market prices,
with an input layer of eight units, regarding the prices
and powers of the same period of the previous day, and
the same week days of the previous three weeks. The
intermediate hidden layer has four units and the output
has one unit – the predicted bid price of the analyzed
agent for the period in question.
There are ﬁve forecasting strategies based on statis-
tical approaches, using average values or regressions
from previous days. Even though this type of strate-
gies, especially those based on averages, may seem
too simple, they present good results when forecasting
players’ behaviors, taking only a small amount of time
for their execution. These strategies consider different
time horizons, such as:
– Average of prices and powers from the agents’
past actions database, using the data from the 30
days prior to the current simulation day, consid-
ering only the same period as the current case, of
the same week day;
– Average of the agent’s bid prices considering the
data from one week prior to the current simula-
tion day, considering only business days, and only
the same period as the current case. This strat-
egy is only performed when the simulation is at
a business day. This approach, considering only
the most recent days and ignoring the distant past,
gives us a proposal that can very quickly adapt to
the most recent changes in t his agent’s behavior.
It is also a good strategy for agents that tend to
perform similar actions along the week;
– Average of the data from the four months prior to
the current simulation day, considering only the
same period as the current case. This offers an ap-
proach based on a longer term analysis;
– Regression on the data from the four months prior
to the current simulation day, considering only the
same period of the day;
– Regression on the data of the last week, consider-
ing only business days. This strategy is only per-
formed when the simulation is at a business day.
About pattern analysis there are three algorithms
concerning: the most repeated sequence along the his-
toric of actions of the player; the most recent sequence
among all the found ones; sequences in the past match-
ing the last few actions. In the latter approach the se-
quences of at least 3 actions found along the historic of
actions of the player are considered. The sequences are
treated depending on their size. The longer matches to
the recent history are attrib uted a higher importance.
There is also an algorithm based on history match-
ing, regarding not only the player actions, but also the
results obtained. This algorithm ﬁnds the previous time
that the last result happened, i.e., what the player did,
or how he reacted, the last time he performed the same
action and got the same result.
Another simple but efﬁcient method for players that
tend to perform recurrent actions, is an algorithm re-
turning the most repeated action of the player.
Finally, we have second-Guessing the predictions.
Assuming that the players whose actions we are pre-
dicting are gifted with intelligent behavior, it is essen-
tial to shield this system, avoiding being predictable as
well. So this method aims to be prepared to situations
when the competitors are expecting the actions that the
system is performing. We consider second and third-
guesses.
Second-Guess, if the prediction on a player action is
P , and it is expecting the system to perform an action
P 1 that will overcome its expected action, so in fact
the player will perform an action P 2 that overcomes
the system’s expected P 1. This algorithm prediction
is the P 2 action, in order for the system to expect the
player’s prediction.
Third-Guess is one step above the previous algo-
rithm. If a player already understood the system’s sec-
ond guess and is expecting the system to perform an
action that overcomes the P 2 action, than it will per-
form an action P 3 that overcomes the system predic-
tion, and so, this strategy returns P 3 as the predicted
player action.

T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis 339
Concerning Self Model prediction, once again if a
player is gifted with intelligent behavior, it can perform
the same historical analysis on the system’s behavior
as the system performs on the others. This strategy per-
forms an analysis on its own historic of actions, to pre-
dict what itself is expected to do next. From that the
system can change its predicted action, to overcome
the players that may be expecting it to perform that
same predicted action.
In the Second-Guess/Self Model prediction, the
same logic is applied as before, this time considering
the expected play resulting from the Self Model pre-
diction.
3. Game theory based scenario analysis
The scenario analysis algorithm supports strategic
behavior with the aim of providing complex support to
develop and implement dynamic pricing strategies.
Each agent develops a strategic bid, taking into ac-
count not only its previous results but also other play-
ers’ bids and results and expected future reactions. This
is particularly suitable for markets based on a pool or
for hybrid markets, to support Sellers and Buyers de-
cisions for proposing bids to the pool and accepting or
not a bilateral agreement. The algorithm is based on the
analysis of several bids under different scenarios. The
analysis results are used to build a matrix which sup-
ports the application of a decision method to select the
bid to propose. Each agent has historical information
about market behavior and about other agents’ charac-
teristics and past actions. This algorithm’s organization
is presented in Fig. 1.
To get warrantable data, agents using this method
perform an analysis of the historical data. With the
gathered information, ag ents can build a proﬁle of
other agents including information about their ex-
pected proposed prices, limit prices, and capacities.
With these proﬁles, and based on the agent own objec-
tives, several scenarios, and the possible advantageous
bids for each one, are deﬁned.
Seller and Buyer agents interact with each other, in
MASCEM environment, taking into account that their
results are inﬂuenced by competitor’s decisions. Game
theory is well suited for analyzing these kinds of situ-
ations [6,23].
3.1. Scenario deﬁnition
MASCEM is implemented as a Decision Support
tool, so the user should have the ﬂexibility to decide
Fig. 1. Scenario analysis algorithm. (Colours are visible in the online
version of the article; http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/ICA-130438)
how many and which scenarios should be analyzed. To
do so, the user must deﬁne the scenarios to be sim-
ulated by specifying the price that competitor agents
will propose Eq. (4):
Pricei = λ× Probable_Pricei +ϕ× Limit_Pricei,,
λ andϕ> =0 ,λ +ϕ =1 (4)
where λ and ϕ are scaling factors that can be different
for each agent and for each scenario.
The Probable_Price is a predicted value concerning
the expected bidding price of each competitor player.
This prediction is reached by using the players’ pro-
ﬁles deﬁnition mechanism, presented in section 2. This
prediction allows the proposed method to use adequate
and realistic values when c onsidering other players’
actions.
The Limit_Price corresponds to maximum price that
can be bided by a seller agent, or the minimum price
that can be bided by a buyer agent.
Equation (4) is used to provide the deﬁnition of al-
ternative scenarios, concerning agents may deﬁne bids
between their limit and probable prices.
Let us suppose that the user selects λ = 0a n dϕ = 1
for every Seller and λ = 1a n dϕ = 0 for every Buyer;
this means an analysis of a pessimistic scenario. If the
user selects λ = 1a n d ϕ = 0 for every agent, then
the most probable scenario will be analyzed. Using this
formula the user can deﬁne for each agent the proposed
prices for every scenario that it desires to consider.

340 T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis
Each scenario considers a ﬁxed number of players,
each with constant amounts of power. Only the bidding
prices for each player vary from scenario to scenario.
3.2. Bid deﬁnition
An agent should analyze the income that results
from bidding its limit, desired, and competitive prices –
those that are just slightly lower (or higher, in the buy-
ers’ case) than its competitors’ prices.
A play is deﬁned as a pair of bid – scenario, so,
the total number of plays to analyze for each player is
Eq. (5):
n = number_of_bids × number_of_scenarios (5)
and the maximum value it can achieve is Eq. (6):
(2×n +2 ) × 2n (6)
considering that agents only bid their limit or expected
prices. However, an agent may bid prices between its
limit and expected prices, or even above that limit
price. If we consider each agent may bid numprices
prices, the number of scenarios becomes equal to npn,
and the number of plays to analyze is Eq. (7).
(numprices ×n +2 )× numpricesn (7)
The user is also allowed to choose the number of bids
that will be considered as possibilities for the ﬁnal bid.
In this case, the value of the bids is calculated depend-
ing on an interval of values that can also be deﬁned by
the user. That interval is always centered on a trusted
value, the value of the market price of the same pe-
riod of the previous day. In this way the considered
possible bids are always around that reference value,
and their range of variance depends on the bigger or
smaller value of the user deﬁned interval.
So, being nb the number of bids deﬁned by the user,
int the value deﬁning the interval to be considered, and
mp the market price from the same period of the previ-
ous day, the possible bids b1...nb are deﬁned as Eqs (8)
and (9):
b1 = mp− int
2 (8)
bm = bm−1 +
( int
nb− 1
)
,m ∈ [2,nb ] (9)
After deﬁning all the scenarios and bids, market sim-
ulation is applied to build a matrix with the expected
results for each play.
The matrix analysis with the simulated plays’ results
is inspired on the game theory concepts for a pure-
strategy two-player game, assuming each player seeks
to minimize the maximum possible loss or maximize
the minimum possible gain.
After each negotiation period, an agent may in-
crease, decrease or maintain its bid, increasing the
number of scenarios to analyze. So, after k periods,
considering only three possible bid updates, the num-
ber of plays to analyze becomes Eq. (10):
(np×n +2 )×npn × 3(k−1)×n (10)
3.3. Game theory for scenario analysis
A seller, like an offensive player, will try to maxi-
mize the minimum possible gain by using the MaxiMin
decision method. A buyer, like a defensive player, will
select the strategy with the smallest maximum payoff
by using the MiniMax decision method.
Buyers’ matrix analysis leads to the selection of only
those situations in which all the consumption needs are
fulﬁlled. This avoids situations in which agents have
reduced expenses but cannot satisfy their consumption
needs completely.
The state space to be searched is related to the possi-
ble plays of other agents, regarding possible bids from
one agent. Figure 2 illustrates this procedure.
Fig. 2. Game theory for scenario-space search. (Colours are vis-
ible in the online version of the article; http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/
ICA-130438)
Each bid of a speciﬁc agent (e.g. Ag i) is analyzed
by considering several possible scenarios, in order to
support the decision of this agent. The scenarios are
evaluated by considering the prices other agents may
propose, regarding the previous proposed prices. It is
also considered that each agent may change its price:
increasing a lot (↑↑), increasing a little (↑), maintaining
(-), decreasing a little ( ↓), or decreasing a lot ( ↓↓) its

T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis 341
bid price (A little means from 0 to 10% and a lot from
10% to 30%). Here the concepts of little and lot will
consider the historic data of agents’ bids and will be
converted to variations in cents. It is important to ob-
serve that it is impossible to consider all kind of varia-
tions, due to the complexity of the problem, as we have
seen before. The required time for solving the problem
with a large set of combinations would be impractical
since a complete market simulation is required for each
scenario.
Each leaf node of the tree in Fig. 2 corresponds to
a possible scenario. The idea is to evaluate each one
of these scenarios and apply a MiniMax or MaxiMin
based algorithm to select the safest bid to be offered by
agent Agi.
Notice that our use of game theory is intended for
supporting one speciﬁc agent and not for achieving the
equilibrium in the market. The idea of the methodology
proposed in this paper is to provide a speciﬁc agent
with decision support.
For each simulated scenario (leaf of Fig. 2) we will
calculate the price Pmarket for each MW .h (Megawatt
hour), deﬁned as the result of the simulated market.
For the support of seller agents the evaluation of the
scenario (in proﬁts, F ) is made by the product of the
energy sold by the supported agent Agi, Energy_Soldi,
by the proﬁt, obtained from the difference between
Pmarket and the cost associated to each MW .h sold by
Agi, Costi, according to Eq. (11):
F = Energy_soldi · (Pmarket −Costi) (11)
Notice that the part of this formula that demands the
higher processing cost is the calculation of the value
Pmarket , since it implies to run the simulation of the
scenario in order to determine the market clearing
price.
Additionally, there are two methods for solving
problems of equality in the evaluation of scenarios. In
case of a seller, the MaxiMin algorithm chooses the bid
that offers the maximum gain, from the worst possible
scenario. In case of more than one scenario being eval-
uated with equal value as worst scenario, the options
for choosing among them are:
– a greedy approach, choosing the scenario, among
the equally worst ones, that presents the bid that
allows the higher payoff from all the possible
bids;
– an average of the results of all possible bids for
these scenarios, choosing the one that gets the
worst average as the worst possible scenario.
The user is able to choose among these two meth-
ods for solving the problems of equality. He can also
choose a third option that is a mechanism that chooses
automatically among these two options, accordingly to
the success that each of them is presenting. This mech-
anism uses a reinforcemen t learning algorithm, with
initial equal values of conﬁdence for the two options.
As the time evolves, the values of success of each op-
tion are updated, and the one that presents the best con-
ﬁdence in each run, is the one chosen.
The updating of these conﬁdence values is per-
formed by running the two options and saving the an-
swer proposed by each one. Later, after the bid is cho-
sen as the agent’s action for the actual market, this
method analyzes the market values and checks which
of the outputs proposed by each method would have
led to the best results.
This procedure is similar to the one used for updat-
ing the values of the players’ proﬁle deﬁnition method-
ology, by comparing the values proposed by each of the
algorithms used for forecasting with the actual actions
the each player performed in the market.
The scenario analysis al gorithm is implemented in
JAVA ,1 for a smoother integration with MASCEM sim-
ulator. However, for efﬁciency issues, the majority of
data analysis methods, namely the pattern analysis and
history matching algorithms for players’ proﬁles def-
inition, are implemented in LP A Prolog. 2 The neural
network was developed in MatLab. 3
4. Experimental ﬁndings
This section presents a case study with two main ob-
jectives: (i) understand how to use the proposed ap-
proach, by comparing the performance of different pa-
rameterizations; (ii) compare the results that can be
achieved with the proposed approach and with other
reference decision support strategies.
The results are evaluated by comparing the incomes
that are achieved in an electricity market simulation,
using the different approaches and parameterizations.
4.1. Case study characterization
This case study concerns three simulations under-
taken using MASCEM, referring to the same 16 con-
1http://www.java.com/.
2http://www.lpa.co.uk/.
3http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.

342 T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis
secutive days, starting from Friday, 15th October,
2010. The data used in this case study has been based
on real data extracted from the Iberian market – Iberial
Electricity Market – MIBEL [24].
These simulations involve 7 buyers and 5 sellers (3
regular sellers and 2 VPPs). This group of agents was
created with the intention of r epresenting the Iberian
reality, reduced to a smaller group, containing the es-
sential aspects of different parts of the market, al-
lowing a better individual analysis and study of the
interactions and potentiality of each of those actors.
This group of agents results from the studies presented
in [33].
4.1.1. Simulated agents strategic behavior
For these simulations we will consider different bid-
dings for each agent. Seller 2, which will be our test
reference, will use the proposed method with different
parameters in each of the three simulations. This al-
lows comparing the perform ance of this method when
using distinct parameterizations and taking conclu-
sions on its suitability and the inﬂuence of the differ-
ent parameters presented in Section 3. This section ad-
ditionally presents the comparison between the results
obtained by each of the three considered parameteriza-
tions and the results obtained by using two other strate-
gies which are well established and with veriﬁed per-
formance and results, in ord er to determine in what de-
gree the proposed game theory based strategy is best
or worst suited for providing decision support to mar-
ket players. These strategies are: (i) the AMES strat-
egy [20]; (ii) the SA-QL strategy [32].
The AMES strategy is used by the AMES electricity
markets simulator [20] to provide support to the mod-
elled players when bidding in the market. This strat-
egy is based on a study of the efﬁciency and reliabil-
ity of the Wholesale Power Market Platform (WPMP),
a market design proposed by the U.S. Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission for common adoption by all
U.S. wholesale power markets [11,12]. The AMES
strategy was adapted by the authors of this paper in a
previous work [25], to suit it to the purposes of asym-
metrical and symmetrical pool markets, such as the
Iberian Electricity market – MIBEL [24]. This strategy
uses a reinforcement learning algorithm – the Roth-
Erev algorithm [17] to choose from a set of the pos-
sible actions (or Action Domain) which is based on
the companies’ production costs analysis. Addition-
ally, the Simulated Annealing heuristic [4] is imple-
mented to accelerate the convergence process.
The SA-QL strategy [32] is similar to the AMES
strategy in its fundamentals: the use of a reinforce-
ment learning algorithm to choose the best from a set
of possible actions. The differences concern two main
aspects: the used reinforcement learning algorithm is
the Q-Learning [18] algorithm; and the set of differ-
ent possible bids to be used by the market negotiat-
ing agent is determined by a focus on the most prob-
able points of success (in the area surrounding the ex-
pected market price). This strategy also uses the Sim-
ulated Annealing heuristic to accelerate the process of
convergence.
The other simulated players’ bids are deﬁned as fol-
lows:
– Buyer 1 – This buyer buys power independently
of the market price. The offer price is 18.30
c /kWh (this value is much higher than average
market price).
– Buyer 2 – This buyer bid price varies between two
ﬁxed prices, depending on the periods when it re-
ally needs to buy, and the ones in which the need
is lower. The two variations are 10.00 and 8.00
c /kWh.
– Buyer 3 – This buyer bid price is ﬁxed at 4.90
c /kWh.
– Buyer 4 – This buyer bid considers the average
prices of the last 4 Wednesdays.
– Buyer 5 – This buyer bid considers the average
prices of the last 4 months.
– Buyer 6 – This buyer bid considers the average
prices of the last week (considering only business
days).
– Buyer 7 – This buyer only buys power if market
prices are lower than average market price.
– Seller 1 – This seller needs to sell all the power
that he produces. The offer price is 0.00 c /kWh.
– Seller 3 – This seller bid considers the average
prices of the last 4 months with an increment of
0.5 c /kWh.
– VPP 1 – Includes 4 wind farms and offers a
ﬁxed value along the day. The offer price is 3.50
c /kWh.
– VPP 2 – Includes 1 photovoltaic, 1 co-generation
and 1 mini-hydro plants; the offer price is based
on the costs of co-generation and the total fore-
casted production.
4.1.2. Parameterization
The common parameters in all the simulations using
the game theory strategy are: the selection of the auto-
matic mechanism for solving the problems of equality
among scenarios; for all seller agents the limit price is
ﬁxed as 0 c /kWh, for it does not make sense to bid

T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis 343
A
B
C
Fig. 3. Incomes obtained by Seller 2 in the ﬁrst period of the
considered 16 days, using: A) the ﬁrst parameterization, B) the
second parameterization, C) the t hird parameteri zation. (Colours
are visible in the online version of the article; http://dx.doi.org/
10.3233/ICA-130438)
negative values; for all buyer agents the limit price is
20 c /kWh, a high value for allowing the players to
consider a good margin of prices. Also, the selected
reinforcement learning algorithm for the players’ pro-
ﬁles deﬁnition has been the revised Roth-Erev, with
equal value of the algorithms weight. The past expe-
rience weight W value is set to 0.4, a small value to
grant higher inﬂuence to the most recent results, so that
it can quickly learn and catch new tendencies in play-
ers’ actions. For each scenario the scaling factors for
competitors’ probable priceλ and limit priceϕ, will be
equal for every competitor agent, in order to give the
same importance to the price forecast of each agent.
These scaling factors will only vary from scenario to
scenario, but always maintaining the equality among
agents.
The variations introduced in each simulation are as
follows.
In the ﬁrst simulation Seller 2 will use the scenario
analysis method with a small number of considered
scenarios and possible bids. This test will allow us to
perceive if a restrict group of scenarios, and conse-
quent advantage in processing speed, will be reﬂected
on a big difference in the results quality. For this sim-
ulation the number of considered scenarios is 3, the
number of considered bids is 5, and the interval for the
possible bids deﬁnition is 8. Considering the 3 scenar-
ios, the ﬁrst will attribute to all agents λ = 1a n dϕ =
0; the second λ = 0,95 and ϕ = 0,05; and the third
λ = 0,9 and ϕ = 0,1. These values give higher impor-
tance to the most probable prices, in order to consider
the most realistic scenarios.
In the second simulation Seller 2 will use the sce-
nario analysis method with an intermediate number of
considered scenarios and possible bids. The number of
considered scenarios is 5, the number of considered
bids is 7, and the interval for the possible bids deﬁni-
tion is 8. Considering the 5 scenarios, the ﬁrst will at-
tribute to all agents λ = 1a n dϕ = 0; the second λ =
0,95 and ϕ = 0,05; the third λ = 0,9 and ϕ = 0,1; the
fourth λ = 0,8 and ϕ = 0,2; and the ﬁfth λ = 0,7 and
ϕ = 0,3.
Finally, in the third simulation Seller 2 will use the
method with a higher number of considered scenarios
and possible bids, in order to obtain a more detailed
analysis. The number of considered scenarios is 7, the
number of considered bids is 10, and the interval for
the possible bids deﬁnition is 10, granting also a bigger
interval for considered bids. Considering the 7 scenar-
ios, the ﬁrst will attribute to all agents λ = 1a n dϕ =
0; the second λ = 0,95 and ϕ = 0,05; the third λ =
0,9 and ϕ = 0,1; the fourth λ = 0,8 and ϕ = 0,2; the
ﬁfth λ = 0,7 and ϕ = 0,3; the sixth λ = 0,5 and ϕ =
0,5; and the seventh λ = 0,2 and ϕ = 0,8.
After the simulations, the incomes obtained by
Seller 2 using the proposed method with each of the
three combinations of parameters can be compared.
This agent’s power production to be negotiated in the
market will remain constant at 50 MW for each pe-
riod throughout the simulations. Regarding the costs of
all players, they are deﬁned as null, for facilitating the
comparison of the results.
4.2. Results
Since the reinforcement learning algorithm for the
players’ proﬁles deﬁnition treats each period of the day

344 T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis
A
B
C
Fig. 4. Incomes obtained by Selle r 2 in the twelfth period of the
considered 16 days, using: A) the ﬁrst parameterization, B) the
second parameterization, C) the t hird parameteri zation. (Colours
are visible in the online version of the article; http://dx.doi.org/
10.3233/ICA-130438)
Fig. 5. Total incomes obtained by Seller 2 for the considered 16 days.
as a distinct case, the analysis of the development of
the performance must be done for each period individ-
ually. Figure 3 presents the evolution of Seller 2 in-
comes in the ﬁrst period of each considered day, along
the 16 days, using each of th e three considered combi-
nations of parameters.
Figure 4 Presents the results of Seller 2 in the twelfth
period of each considered day.
Figure 5 presents the comparison between the three
parameterizations of the game theory strategy and the
other two strategies’ performance: The AMES strat-
egy, and the SA-QL.
4.3. Discussion of the results
Comparing the graphs presented in Fig. 3, it can be
concluded that the ﬁrst simulation was clearly the most
disadvantageous for Seller 2 for this period. The sec-
ond and third simulations present very similar results
in what concerns the incomes obtained by this agent in
the ﬁrst period.
The results of the twelfth period (Fig. 4) show the
ﬁrst parameterization worst results when compared
with the other two. However, in this case, the third pa-
rameterization clearly obtained better results than the
second one. The global results for all periods of the
considered 16 days, presented in Fig. 5, support this
tendency.
From Fig. 5 it is visible th at the ﬁrst parameteriza-
tion presents a large difference from the other two, and
a smaller difference between the results achieved by
the second and third parame terizations can be clearly
seen. The comparison of the different parameteriza-
tions’ performances allows taking an important con-
clusion: when it is required for the simulations to im-
prove the processing times, a criterious reduction of the
search space may not represent a signiﬁcant decrease
of the method’s effectiveness. As proven by simulation
2, which even though considering fewer scenarios and
possible bids than the parameterization of simulation 3,
its results were still acceptable for situations for which
the method’s processing time is crucial.
Regarding the comparison between the use of the
game theory strategy and the other two comparing
strategies, it is visible that the ﬁrst parameterization
of the proposed strategy achieves lower results than
the two reference strategies. This was expected and it
is easily justiﬁed by the low number of scenarios and
possible bids that this parameterization concerned. The
second parameterization achieves very similar results
to the ones obtained by the two reference strategies.
This means that, even using an intermediate number of
scenarios and bids, the proposed game theory strategy
is capable of achieving leve ls of performance that are

T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis 345
similar to the results of reference and well established
strategies. In what concerns to the third parameteriza-
tion, it is capable of achieving best results than any of
the other strategies, for the considered days. This is a
motivating result, suggesting that the proposed method
is able to provide better results to a market negotiat-
ing player’s actions, when the parameters are suitably
deﬁned.
5. Conclusions and future work
This paper proposed a computational model for bid
deﬁnition in electricity markets. The proposed model
comprises the deﬁnition of markets scenarios, concern-
ing different perspectives and the electricity markets
evolution; other players proﬁles deﬁnitions, based on
the analysis of the gathered information through pre-
diction algorithms; the establishment of a set of pos-
sible actions taking into account each current context
and the adaptation of the game theory concept to the
electricity market negotiation environment, intended
for supporting one speciﬁc agent and not for achieving
the equilibrium in the market. The proposed method
was integrated in MASCEM, an electricity market sim-
ulator developed by the authors’ research centre.
The model proves to be adequate for providing deci-
sion support to electricity markets players, allowing an
analysis of different scenarios, taking into account the
predictions of competitor players’ actions.
The results presented in the experimental ﬁndings
section show that it can achieve good results when
using suitable parameterizations, as in simulation 3.
These good results are also shown not to be directly
proportional to the scenarios search space, which is a
relevant aspect when dealing with timely exigent sim-
ulations. This conclusion facilitates the adaptability of
the decision making process regarding the method’s ef-
ﬁciency and effectiveness.
Additionally, when comparing the results of the pro-
posed game theory strategy with the performance of
two other well documented and reference strategies, it
was found that this strategy is capable of achieving best
results when the parameter s are deﬁned correctly. In
fact, even when opting by a faster but less broad ap-
proach (parameterization w ith less considered scenar-
ios and a smaller action domain), the game theory strat-
egy was still able to achieve results in the same range
as the reference strategies.
Considering the improvement of this method, fur-
ther work will be done in what concerns a detailed
analysis in the neighborhood of the scenario selected
by the algorithm. To achieve this, an evolutionary ap-
proach will be included and combined with the game
theory.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by FEDER Funds through
COMPETE program and by National Funds through
FCT under the projects FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER:
PEst-OE/EEI/UI0760/2011, PTDC/EEA-EEL/099832
/2008, PTDC/SEN-ENR/099844/2008, PTDC/SEN-E
NR/122174/2010 and PTDC/EEA-EEL/122988/2010.
References
[1] M. Ahmadlou and H. Adeli, Enhanced Probabilistic Neural
Network with Local Decision Circles: A Robust Classiﬁer,
Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 17(3) (2010), 197–
210.
[2] R. Badaway, B. Hirch and S. Albayrak, Agent-Based Co-
ordination Techniques for Ma tching Supply and Demand in
Energy Networks, Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering
17(4) (2010), 373–382.
[3] R. Badawy, A. Y assine, A. Heßler, B. Hirsch and S. Albayrak,
A Novel Multi-Agent System Utilizing Quantum-Inspired
Evolution for Demand Side Ma nagement in the Future Smart
Grid, Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 20(2) (2013),
127–141.
[4] S. Bandyopadhyay, Multiobjective Simulated Annealing for
Fuzzy Clustering With Stability and V alidity, IEEE Transac-
tions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications
and Reviews 41(5) (2011), 682–691.
[5] P . Baraldi, R. Canesi, E. Zio, R. Seraoui and R. Chevalier, Ge-
netic algorithm-based wrapper a pproach for grouping condi-
tion monitoring signals of nuclear power plant components,
Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 18(3) (2011), 221–
234.
[6] S. Ceppi and N. Gatti, An algorithmic game theory study of
wholesale electricity markets based on central auction, Inte-
grated Computer-Aided Engineering 17(1) (2010), 273–290.
[7] B. Chen and W. Liu, Mobile Agent Computing Paradigm for
Building a Flexible Structural Health Monitoring Sensor Net-
work, Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
25(7) (2010), 504–516.
[8] L. Cristaldi, F. Ponci, M. Faifer and M. Riva, Multi-agent Sys-
tems: an Example of Power System Dynamic Reconﬁgura-
tion, Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 17(4) (2010),
359–372.
[9] A. Dahabiah, J. Pontes and B. Solaiman, Fusion of possibilis-
tic sources of evidences for pattern recognition, Integrated
Computer-Aided Engineering 17(2) (2010), 117–130.
[10] A. Dore and C. Regazzoni, Interaction Analysis with a
Bayesian Trajectory Model, IEEE Intelligent Systems 25(3)
(2010), 32–40.
[11] Federal Energy Regulat ory Commission, Notice of White
Paper, U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 4(28)
(2003).

346 T. Pinto et al. / Strategic bidding in electricity markets: An agent-based simulator with game theory for scenario analysis
[12] Federal Energy Regulator y Commission, Report to Congress
on competition in the wholesale and retail markets for elec-
tric energy, U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
Available: http://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/fed-sta/ene-
pol-act/epact-ﬁnal-rpt.pdf.
[13] A.J. Fougères and E. Ostrosi, Fuzzy agent-based approach
for consensual design synthesis in product conﬁguration, Inte-
grated Computer-Aided Engineering 20(3) (2013), 259–274.
[14] S. Freitag, W. Graf and M. Kaliske, Recurrent neural networks
for fuzzy data, Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 18(1)
(2011), 265–280.
[15] J.O. Gutierrez-Garcia and K.M. Sim, Agent-based Cloud
Workﬂow Execution, Integrated Computer-Aided Engineer-
ing 19(1) (2012), 39–56.
[16] B. Heilmann, N.E. El Faouz i, O. de Mouzon, N. Hainitz,
H. Koller, D. Bauder and C. Ant oniou, Predicting Motorway
Trafﬁc Performance by Data Fusion of Local Sensor Data and
Electronic Toll Collection Data, Computer-Aided Civil and
Infrastructure Engineering 26(6) (2011), 451–463.
[17] Z. Jing, H.W. Ngan, Y .P . Wang, Y . Zhang and J.H. Wang,
Study on the convergence property of re learning model in
electricity market simulation, Advances in Power System
Control, Operation and Man-agement, 2009.
[18] C. Juang and C. Lu, Ant Colony Optimization Incor-porated
With Fuzzy Q-Learning for Reinforcement Fuzzy Control,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part A:
Systems and Humans 39(3) (2009), 597–608.
[19] V . Koritarov, Real-World Market Representation with Agents:
Modeling the Electricity Market as a Complex Adaptive Sys-
tem with an Agent-Based Approach, IEEE Power and Energy
magazine (2004), 39–46.
[20] H. Li and L. Tesfatsion, Development of Open Source Soft-
ware for Power Market Research: The AMES Test Bed, Jour-
nal of Energy Markets 2(2) (2009), 111–128.
[21] Y . Lim, H.M. Kim, S. Kang and T. Kim, V ehicle-to-Grid
Communication System for Electric V ehicle Charging, Inte-
grated Computer-Aided Engineering 19(1) (2012), 57–65.
[22] A. Nejat and I. Damnjanovi c, Agent-based Modeling of Be-
havioral Housing Recovery Following Disasters, Computer-
Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 27(10) (2012),
748–763.
[23] J. Neumann, The essence of game theory, IEEE Potentials
22(2) (2003).
[24] Operador del Mercado Ibérico de Energia, Polo Español –
homepage, http://www.omie.es, accessed on December 2011.
[25] T. Pinto, Z. V ale, F. Rodrigues, I. Praca and H. Morais, Cost
Dependent Strategy for Electricity Markets Bidding Based on
Adaptive Reinforcement Learning, International Conference
on Intelligent System Application on Power Systems – ISAP ,
2011.
[26] I. Praça, C. Ramos, Z. V ale and M. Cordeiro, MASCEM: A
Multi-Agent System that Simulates Competitive Electricity
Markets, IEEE Intelligent Systems – Special Issue on Agents
and Markets 18(6) (2003), 54–60.
[27] M. Prymek and A. Horak, Multi-agent Approach to Power
Distribution Network Modelling, Integrated Computer-Aided
Engineering 17(4) (2010), 291–303.
[28] U. Reuter, A Fuzzy Approach for Modelling Non-stochastic
Heterogeneous Data in Engineering Based on Cluster Anal-
ysis, Integrated Computer-Aided En-gineering 18(3) (2011),
281–289.
[29] E.J. Rodrıguez-Seda, D.M. Stipanovic and M.W. Sponga,
Teleoperation of Multi-Agent Systems with Nonuniform Con-
trol Input Delays, Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering
19(2) (2012), 125–136.
[30] G. Santos, T. Pinto, H. Morais, I. Praca and Z. V ale, Complex
Market integration in MASCEM electricity market simulator,
International Conference on the European Energy Market 11 –
EEM, 2011.
[31] M. Shahidehpour, H. Y amin and Z. Li, Market Operations in
Electric Power Systems: Forecasting, Scheduling, and Risk
Management, Wiley-IEEE Press, 2002, pp. 233–274.
[32] A. Tellidou and A. Bakirtzis, Agent-Based Analysis of
Monopoly Power in Electricity Ma rkets’, International Con-
ference on Intelligent Systems Applications to Power Sys-
tems, 2007.
[33] Z. V ale, T. Pinto, I. Praça and H. Morais, MASCEM – Elec-
tricity markets simulation with strategic players, IEEE Intel-
ligent Systems – Special Issue on AI in Power Systems and
Energy Markets 26(2) (2011), 54–60.
[34] Z. V ale, T. Pinto, H. Morais, I. Praça and P . Faria, VPP’s
Multi-Level Negotiation in Smart Grids and Competitive
Electricity Markets, IEEE PES General Meeting – PES-GM,
2011.
[35] E. Wandekokem, E. Mendel, F. Fabris, M. V alentim, R.
Batista, F. V arejão and T. Rauber, Diagnosing multiple faults
in oil rig motor pumps using support vector machine classiﬁer
ensembles, Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering 18(1)
(2011), 61–74.
