Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination (2023) 18:5–57
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11403-021-00324-7
REGULAR ARTICLE
The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate:
market forecasting with a spatial agent-based model
Benjamin Patrick Evans 1 · Kirill Glavatskiy 1 · Michael S. Harré 1 ·
Mikhail Prokopenko 1
Received: 10 September 2020 / Accepted: 19 February 2021 / Published online: 22 March 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Housing markets are inherently spatial, yet many existing models fail to capture this
spatial dimension. Here, we introduce a new graph-based approach for incorporat-
ing a spatial component in a large-scale urban housing agent-based model (ABM).
The model explicitly captures several social and economic factors that inﬂuence the
agents’ decision-making behaviour (such as fear of missing out, their trend-following
aptitude, and the strength of their submarket outreach), and interprets these factors in
spatial terms. The proposed model is calibrated and validated with the housing market
data for the Greater Sydney region. The ABM simulation results not only include
predictions for the overall market, but also produce area-speciﬁc forecasting at the
level of local government areas within Sydney as arising from individual buy and
sell decisions. In addition, the simulation results elucidate agent preferences in sub-
markets, highlighting differences in agent behaviour, for example, between ﬁrst-time
home buyers and investors, and between both local and overseas investors.
Keywords Agent-based modelling · Spatial models · Housing markets ·
Decision-making · Social inﬂuence · Trend following
JEL Classiﬁcation H31 · R31 · C63 · O18 · D91
The authors are thankful to Paul Ormerod, Adrián Carro and Markus Brede for many helpful discussions
of the baseline model. The authors acknowledge the HPC service at The University of Sydney for
providing HPC resources that have contributed to the research results reported within this paper. The
authors would also like to acknowledge the Securities Industry Research Centre of Asia-Paciﬁc (SIRCA)
and CoreLogic, Inc. (Sydney, Australia) for their data on Greater Sydney housing transactions.
B Benjamin Patrick Evans
benjamin.evans@sydney.edu.au
1 Centre for Complex Systems, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
123

6 B. P. Evans et al.
1 Introduction
Within economic markets, housing markets are unique for a variety of reasons.
The combination of durability, heterogeneity, and spatial ﬁxity ampliﬁes the role of
the dwellings’ perceived value and the buyers and sellers’ expectations (Alhashimi
and Dwyer 2004). The extremely high cost of entry and exit into the market (with
moving fees, agent fees, etc.) further complicates the decision-making of partici-
pating households (Huang and Ge 2009). There are long time delays in the market
response as houses cannot be erected instantaneously to accommodate an increase
in demand (Bahadir and Mykhaylova 2014). The fact that real estate can be seen as
both an investment asset and a consumption good (Piazzesi et al. 2007) [and even
a status good, Wei et al. ( 2012)] magniﬁes the impact of social inﬂuence on both
decision-making and resultant market dynamics and structure.
Consequently, housing markets are notoriously difﬁcult to model as the ensuing
market dynamics generates volatility, with nonlinear responses, and “boom–bust”
cycles (Sinai 2012; Miles 2008; Burnside et al. 2016), making traditional time series
analysis insufﬁcient. Nonlinear dynamics of housing markets are ubiquitous, being
observed throughout the world, from Tokyo (Shimizu et al. 2010) to Los Angeles
(Cheng et al. 2014).
Traditional economic modelling methods, such as dynamic stochastic general equi-
librium models (DSGE), typically use representative aggregated agents while making
strong assumptions about the behaviour of the markets (rational and perfect competi-
tion). Such representative agents may be limiting for economic models (Gallegati and
Kirman 1999). Furthermore, these assumptions (and many other traditional economic
assumptions) are known to be inadequate in housing markets, motivating a well-
recognised need for change in housing market modelling (McMaster and Watkins
1999). In addressing this need, a speciﬁc type of models, called agent-based models
(ABM) has been applied. ABMs aim to capture markets from the “bottom up” (Tesfat-
sion 2002), i.e. by focusing on the decision-making of individual agents in the market,
possibly inﬂuenced by non-economic factors. In this sense, ABMs are capable of
modelling macroeconomies from micro (i.e. agent-speciﬁc) behaviour (LeBaron and
Tesfatsion 2008) and analysing the economic decision-making in counterfactual set-
tings. While ABMs have shown promise in housing market modelling (Geanakoplos
et al. 2012) [and wider economic modelling, Poledna et al. ( 2019)], current ABMs
themselves are not exempt from some limitations. Many of the existing housing ABMs
tend to introduce at least one of the following constraints: the spatial structure of mar-
kets is neglected (meaning submarkets are not considered), perfect information is still
assumed, and/or the impact of social inﬂuence on decision-making of individual agents
is underestimated.
A ﬁne-resolution model of spatiotemporal patterns within such markets is desirable:
it would give an understanding of how market dynamics shape within local areas,
explaining how the pricing structure directly affects the agents’ mobility over time
(i.e. by forcing households out of certain regions due to gentriﬁcation and higher cost
of living). Furthermore, within such housing markets [and in fact, many economic
markets, Conlisk ( 1996)], it is also known that agents do not act perfectly rational
(Wang et al. 2018, instead following bounded rationality Simon 1955, 1957). Firstly,
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 7
humans are often inﬂuenced by social pressure (e.g. herd mentality), with the decisions
being made purely based on social pressure rather than a perfectly rational choice.
Secondly, it is difﬁcult to process all the relevant information in the market (i.e. it is
impractical for an agent to be able to view every dwelling listing within the housing
market). Thus, it is unreasonable to assume that agents act in a perfectly rational
manner, yet this is what many current housing market models assume (despite ABMs
not intrinsically requiring these assumptions to be made).
To address these limitations, we introduce a spatial agent-based model, in which
the constraints imposed by various search and mobility costs create effective spatial
submarkets. These submarkets are modelled graph-theoretically, with a graph-based
component used in both representing imperfect information and modulating social
inﬂuences. The spatial ABM is then capable of capturing the “boom–bust” cycles
observed in Australia (in particular, Greater Sydney) over the last 15 years as arising
from individual agent decisions. That is, we show complex nonlinear market dynamics
as arising through individual buy and sell decisions in the market, with introduced
factors which affect and explain the decision-making behaviour. The model succeeds in
forecasting nonlinear pricing and mobility trends within speciﬁc submarkets and local
areas. In exploring the pricing dynamics, we focus on the inﬂuence of imperfect spatial
information and the role of social inﬂuence on agent decision-making. In doing so, we
identify the salient parameters which drive the overall dynamics and decision-making,
and pinpoint the parameter thresholds, beyond which the resultant dynamics exhibit
strong nonlinear responses. These thresholds allow us to distinguish between different
conﬁgurations of the market (e.g. markets with supply or demand dominating) and
differences in agent behaviour. In addition, we identify and trace speciﬁc interactions
of parameters, in particular the interplay of social inﬂuences, such as the fear of missing
out and the trend-following aptitude, in the presence of imperfect spatial information.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 2, we provide an
overview of agent-based models of housing markets. In Sect.3, we outline the baseline
model, while in Sect.4 we outline the proposed spatial extensions and new parameters.
In Sect. 5, we analyse the sensitivity and parameters of the model, before presenting
the results and discussion in Sect. 6. In Sect. 7, we provide conclusions and highlight
future work.
2 Background
2.1 Agent-based models of housing markets
One of the pioneering works for agent-based modelling (ABM) of the housing markets
was by Geanakoplos et al. ( 2012) [and extended further in Axtell et al. ( 2014), Gold-
stein (2017)], where the Washington DC market was modelled from 1997 to 2009 in
an attempt to understand the housing boom and crash. Macroeconomic experiments
were then conducted to see how changing underlying factors, such as interest rates or
leverage rates, would affect this pricing trend.
Baptista et al. ( 2016) model the UK housing market to see the effects that various
macroprudential policies have on price cycles and price volatility. Gilbert et al. (2009)
123

8 B. P. Evans et al.
also look at the English housing market, varying exogenous parameters and policies,
and tracking the effect these have on median house prices. Likewise, Carstensen (2015)
explores the Danish housing market and macroprudential regulations, such as income
and mortgage rate shocks.
Ge (2017) analyses how housing market bubbles can form (and bust) purely endoge-
nously without external shocks, due to leniency and speculation of agents. Kouwenberg
and Zwinkels (2015) also show an ABM can “endogenously produce boom-and-bust
cycles even in the absence of fundamental news”.
A recent ABM of the Australian housing market proposed by Glavatskiy et al.
(2020) explained the volatility of prices over three distinct historic periods, charac-
terised by either steady trends or trend reversals and price corrections. This model
highlighted the role of the agents’ trend-following aptitude in accurately generating
distinct price dynamics, as detailed in Sect. 3. In this paper, we further develop this
model by introducing several features directly capturing social inﬂuences and bounded
rationality in agent decision-making, as elaborated in Sect. 4.
Traditionally, the modelling goal is to explain the housing market pricing (rather
than predict its trajectory) and trace how possible macroeconomic policy changes
may have affected the dynamics. Here, instead, we focus on predicting the pricing
dynamics beyond the period covered by the current datasets (i.e. presenting out-of-
sample forecasting) as arising from individual buy and sell decision-making behaviour
in the market (as opposed to a black box technical analysis machine learning-based
approach), as well as illuminating agent preferences within speciﬁc housing submar-
kets. This motivation is aligned with the growing suggestions that agent-based models
should be predictive (Polhill 2018) [which has admittedly been met with some resis-
tance, Edmonds and ní Aodha ( 2018)]. Agent-based models have recently been shown
to outperform traditional economic models, such as vector autoregressive models and
DSGE models for out-of-sample forecasting of macrovariables (GDP , inﬂation, inter-
est rates, etc.) (Poledna et al. 2019). For example, it was demonstrated that an ABM
can outperform standard benchmarks for out-of-sample forecasting in the US housing
market (Kouwenberg and Zwinkels2014), while successful out-of-sample forecasting
was carried out by Geanakoplos et al. ( 2012) as well.
2.1.1 Spatial models
Spatial distribution of houses and dependencies between market trends on spatial
patterns have been recognised as important and desirable features (Goldstein 2017).
For example, Baptista et al. ( 2016) describe the spatial component as one that is
“highly desirable”, yet “this approach greatly increases the complexity of the models
and hence most spatial ABMs in the ﬁeld listed below make use of a highly simpliﬁed
representation of the environment, often in the shape of small grids”.
Spatial agent-based models have also shown to be useful in a variety of other
areas such as epidemic modelling (Chang et al. 2020; Cliff et al. 2018), cooperative
behaviour (Power 2009), and symbiotic processes (Raimbault et al. 2020). Despite
the promise shown by housing ABMs, there are currently only relatively few spa-
tial housing market models with the capacity to accurately forecast nonlinear price
dynamics.
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 9
The seminal works in spatial housing ABMs are by Ge ( 2013) and Ustvedt
(2016). Both use a matrix-based approach, with the region being arranged on a two-
dimensional grid. In Ge ( 2013), each cell (row/column) in the grid is assigned a
neighbourhood quality (endogenous) and a nature quality (exogenous). The neigh-
bourhood quality is a measure of attractiveness which aims to capture concepts such
as safety, and is dependent on agents that live in that region (which can change in the
model, thus endogenous). In contrast, nature quality is based on outside factors not
changed by the model, such as distance to a beach or weather (thus exogenous). Data
used in this work are abstract; that is, it is not calibrated to a particular city, but rather
used to trace how these factors affect the trends.
Ustvedt (2016) also uses a two-dimensional grid for a NetLogo model. However,
an important additional spatial step is made: district borders are incorporated using
GIS data (somewhat similar to what we propose in our model with the graph-based
approach, however, there are important differences which we outline below), and the
model is calibrated based on Oslo, Norway.
Another work is Pangallo et al. (2019), which models theoretical (i.e. not calibrated
to any speciﬁc region) income segregation and inequality, using a spatial agent-based
model, and the effect this may have on house prices. Again, this approach uses a two-
dimensional grid for the spatial component. This model assumes a monocentric city,
and measures the “attractiveness” of a location, based on the distance to the (generic)
city centre. The main contribution of this work is a mathematically tractable spatial
model for capturing income segregation. The effects are related to the house prices,
where unequal income is shown to lower the house price globally.
Unexplored Extensions The spatial work outlined above provide strong models which
achieve their purpose of policy understanding and effect of market shocks in Ge (2013)
and Ustvedt (2016). However, the spatial component is often considered a secondary
point of the models, which means there are some key additional insights which have
yet been unexplored. Particularly, the presence of area-speciﬁc submarkets have not
been explicitly modelled, and analysis into the spatial preferences of agents within the
market (and submarkets) have not been explored.
For example, in studies of Ge ( 2013) and Ustvedt ( 2016) the spatial contribution
affects the initial price and the supply of dwellings for a given grid cell (location and
population). However, at every simulated step the effects of the spatial component do
not extend to varying search costs or probability of listing for agents. Furthermore,
the spatial component is not utilised to initialise agent characteristics (such as income,
wealth, etc.), based on the areas in which they reside. These area-speciﬁc agent char-
acteristics and behaviours become particularly important for capturing submarkets
across various areas, especially when real-world data are available.
Another assumption of existing spatial models is that of a monocentric city, meaning
a distance metric such as “distance to centre” is used for measuring attractiveness,
which becomes problematic for polycentric cities or with agents who have no desire
to live within the “centre” when analysing agent preferences. Furthermore, computing
these distances in a 2d grid can often be misinformative, as moving across a region
border (i.e. into a new zone) often incurs a far larger cost than moving a cell inward
into the same zone. To address this, we explicitly capture this feature in the proposed
graph-based spatial extension. Distances are measured as the shortest path through
123

10 B. P. Evans et al.
the graph, with nodes representing various regions (contained within boundaries).
The graph-based approach is particularly useful, as no monocentric assumption is
made.
Furthermore, as detailed area-speciﬁc analysis remains largely unexplored, the dis-
tributions of prices within individual areas is often not considered, instead, using a
representative mean or median rather than sampling from the actual underlying dis-
tributions for each area, which may fail to capture certain area trends. This is often
caused by the lack of underlying data. In our work, we use several contemporary
datasets, such as SIRCA–CoreLogic and the Australian Census datasets, constructing
the relevant pricing probability density functions for each area.
In summary, in contrast to the grid-based approach commonly used, in this work,
we propose an extensible graph-based approach which is described in Sect. 4. Such an
approach allows us to further exploit the spatial component by introducing submarkets
with graph-based search costs and initialisation of agent characteristics based on areas,
giving insights into area-speciﬁc submarkets which have not yet been explored. In
addition, the graph-based approach does not assume a monocentric region, allowing
for polycentric cities [which Greater Sydney is developing towards Greater Sydney
Commission (2018), Crosato et al. ( 2021)] to be modelled more effectively.
3 The Baseline model
This work extends the work of Glavatskiy et al. ( 2020), which we will refer to as the
“Baseline” method. In this section, we describe basic features of the baseline model,
which the present work carries over.
3.1 Agents
There are three key agent types in the model: dwellings, households, and the bank.
A dwelling is a “physical” property, e.g. a house, apartment or condo. Each dwelling
has an intrinsic quality, which reﬂects its hedonic value (e.g. large house or existence of
a pool). The quality is ﬁxed during the simulation. The quality of a dwelling is used as
a reference for determining its listing price and dwelling payments. All dwellings have
an owner. Dwellings can be rented or sold. A rental contract is a binding agreement
between the owner and renting household. Dwellings may be vacant at any period
(which means that they are not rented out).
A household represents a person or group of people (i.e. a family), which reside
within Greater Sydney. Additionally, the model contains overseas agents, which can
participate in the market but do not reside in the Greater Sydney region. Households
have heterogeneous monthly incomes and liquid cash levels. Households can own
several dwellings, but can only reside in one (overseas agents do not reside in any
dwelling). When purchasing a dwelling, households always choose the most expensive
dwelling they can afford. If they can afford to buy a dwelling, they always attempt to
do so, putting a market bid (see below). Households that own more than one dwelling
attempt to rent the additional dwellings out, and, if successful, receive rental payments
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 11
as a contribution to their liquid cash. Households that do not own a dwelling rent one.
Households pay tax based on their income and ownership.
The bank combines the functions of a commercial bank and the regulatory body,
controlling various ﬁnancial characteristics, such as income tax rates, mortgage rates,
overseas approval rates, mortgage approvals, and mortgage amounts (how much can
be lent to a particular household).
3.2 Behavioural rules
The agents’ behaviour is governed by the price they are willing to sell their dwelling
for, the listing price, and the price they can afford to buy a new dwelling, the bid price.
The basis for the pricing equations comes from the pioneering housing market ABM
of Axtell et al. ( 2014).
The household bid price, i.e. their desired expenditure, is modulated by the house-
hold’s monthly income I[t] according to Eq. ( 3.1). Following Axtell et al. ( 2014),
the desired expenditure formulation is the result of an analysis into income dynamics,
motivated by the 1
3 of income on housing expenses heuristic, with modiﬁcations to
capture a wider range of heterogeneity and expenditures.
B[t]= H Ub[t]φb I[t]φI
φM[t]+ φH − h ∗ /Delta1HPI[t] (3.1)
H is a uniformly random value between 1 ± bh/2 for each bid, where bh = 0.1i s
the listing heterogeneity parameter. This allows variation in bid prices around a central
value (i.e. uniform prices within a range around the centre, in this case, ±5%). Ub[t]
is the urgency of a household to buy a dwelling, which is equal to 1 if the household
has recently not sold any dwelling, and is larger than 1 by a term proportional to the
number of months since the last sale otherwise. Furthermore,φI and φb are the income
modulating parameters, which are calibrated from the mortgage-income regression for
that period of interest. The resulting expenditures are sublinear with income, meaning
high-income agents spend a lower percentage of their income on housing than their
lower-income counterparts. In addition, φM[t] is the mortgage rate at time t, while φH
is the annual household maintenance costs. Finally, h is the trend-following aptitude
and /Delta1HPI[t] is the change in house price index (HPI) over the previous year.
The bid price of the overseas investors is determined as an average, given the total
volume and quantity of the approved overseas investments by the Foreign Investment
Review Board. Several aspects of the overseas investments are detailed in “Appendix
K”.
The dwelling list price P[t] at time t is modulated by the quality of the dwelling
Q according to Eq. ( 3.2). Again, the basis for the listing price equation comes from
the estimation results of Axtell et al. ( 2014), where the formulation arose from a
comprehensive set of real estate transaction data.
P[t]= H b𝓁Qh S[t]bs(1 + Dh[t])bd
U𝓁[t] (3.2)
123

12 B. P. Evans et al.
H is again a uniformly random parameter that behaves the same as in Eq. ( 3.1).
b𝓁 = 1.75 is the listing price factor, showing the extent to which the seller tends to
increase the listing price. Furthermore, Qh is the average sale price of the 10 dwellings
with the most similar quality to the dwelling h for sale. In addition, S[t] is the market
average of the sold-to-list price ratio, bs = 0.22 is the sold to list exponent parameter,
Dh[t] is the number of months the dwelling has been on the market, and bd =− 0.01
is the number of months exponent parameter. Finally, U𝓁[t] is the urgency to sell the
dwelling, which is equal to 1 if the household is not in ﬁnancial stress, and increases
proportionally to the number of months in ﬁnancial stress otherwise.
Banks approve households desired expenditure based on the bank’s lending crite-
ria. The bank uses the households liquidity and monthly income for determining an
appropriate amount to lend and offers the corresponding loan to the household. If the
loan amount is greater than pd × B[t] (with pd = 0.6), then the household accepts
the loan; otherwise, the household skips this round of the market.
The parameters from the baseline method are presented in Table 2, and sensitivity
analysis around the default values of these parameters is given in “Appendix B”, and
more in-depth explanation is given in the study of Glavatskiy et al. ( 2020).
3.3 Market algorithm
An equilibration period is run at the start of the simulation to build up a “history”
of the market, allowing for sales etc. to take place before the true simulation begins.
Household and housing characteristics (such as income or construction) are smoothly
extrapolated in the equilibration period, to match the corresponding values at the
beginning of the actual simulation.
The model runs in sequential steps, with each step representing one month of actual
time. That is, one sequential step (or tick) in the simulation corresponds to one month
in the actual housing market. During every step, the model makes several market
updates:
1. The city demographics are updated (new dwellings and households created to
match the actual projected numbers for the Greater Sydney region).
2. Each household receives income and pays its living costs: non-housing expenses,
maintenance fees and taxes (if owning a dwelling), rent (if renting). The balance
is added to or subtracted from the household’s liquid cash.
3. Expiring rental contracts are renewed.
4. Dwellings are placed on sale.
5. Households put their bids for buying.
6. The buyers and sellers are matched (described below)
7. The households receive mortgages and mortgage contracts from the bank, and the
balance sheets of both buyers and sellers are updated.
To match buyers and sellers, bids and listings are sorted in descending order. Each
listed dwellings is then attempted to match with the highest bid. If the bid price is higher
than the list price, then the deal is made with probability pm = 0.8. Otherwise, the
listing is considered unattended and the next one attempts to match. The pseudo-code
for the process is given in “Appendix C”.
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 13
(a) LGA Boundary Map
CANTERBURY-BANKSTOWN
FAIRFIELD
GEORGES RIVER
CAMDEN
LAKE MACQUARIE
NORTHERN BEACHES
HORNSBY
THE HILLS SHIRE
PENRITH
LIVERPOOL
CAMPBELLTOWN
CENTRAL COAST
WOLLONDILLY
UPPER LACHLAN SHIRE
CANADA BAY
BAYSIDE
SUTHERLAND SHIRE
BLACKTOWN
HAWKESBURY
WILLOUGHBY
LANE COVE
STRATHFIELD
WAVERLEY
RYDE
NORTH SYDNEY
LITHGOW
BURWOOD
BLUE MOUNTAINS
MOSMAN
CITY OF SYDNEY
WOOLLAHRA
KU-RING-GAI
HUNTERS HILL
RANDWICK
INNER WEST
WINGECARRIBEE
CUMBERLAND
CITY OF PARRAMATTA
(b) LGA Network
Fig. 1 Greater Sydney LGAs. On the left, we see the raw GIS data. On the right, the processed graph (with
nodes scaled based on population size)
4 Model extension
In this section, we develop the spatial component of an ABM housing market, effec-
tively introducing submarkets into the model. Speciﬁcally, we investigate how social
aspects inﬂuence selling a dwelling, as well as account for the agents’ preferences to
buy in a nearby neighbourhood when purchasing a dwelling. In doing so, we inves-
tigate how pricing dynamics are driven by individual agent decisions. The spatial
component also affects how households are initialised (i.e. what neighbourhood they
should belong to), and how the prices of nearby dwellings may affect the listing price.
4.1 Spatial component
Greater Sydney is composed of 38 local government areas (LGAs), each of which
contains several suburbs (and postcode areas). The data provide sales at a postcode
level and the LGA level. However, the postcode data may be too granular as the number
of listings in a given time period for small areas could be low or even zero. For this
reason, we analyse the data at the LGA level, but the proposed approach is general and
can be used at any level of granularity (i.e. over countries, states, cities, government
areas, postcodes, suburbs, or even individual streets) assuming the data are available.
The LGAs are visualised in Fig. 1a.
4.1.1 Graph-based topology
To incorporate the LGA areas into the ABM, the data must be converted to an appro-
priate data structure. This is achieved by converting the map (from Fig. 1a) into an
undirected graph G, with equal edge weights of 1 (i.e. unweighted, the weighted
extensions are discussed below) shown in Fig. 1b. In doing so, the topology of the
123

14 B. P. Evans et al.
spatial relationships of the suburbs is preserved but not the exact locations, i.e. the x,
y coordinates of latitude and longitude are not needed.
Each of the N LGAs (shaded polygon) in Fig. 1a is converted into a vertex vi ,
i ∈[ 1,..., N]. The cardinality of the set of all vertices V is |V|= 38 corresponding
to the 38 LGAs. Two LGA areas vi and v j are adjacent to one another if they share
a border (darker lines in Fig. 1a) and these borders are converted to the set of edges
E all of weight one that form an adjacency matrix G for the LGAs. Formally there
is a 2-D spatial region for Sydney (the map of Sydney): M, composed of the N non-
overlapping LGAs that form a complete cover of Sydney and each LGA shares at least
one border with another LGA. LGA( x) associates a graph vertex x with an LGA, and
Adj(li ,l j ), deﬁned for two LGAs li and l j , is a function measuring the length of their
common border in M:
V ={ vi | i ∈[ 1,..., N], LGA(vi) ∈ M}, (4.1)
E ={ ei, j = 1 | vi,v j ∈ V, i ⁄= j, Adj(LGA(vi), LGA(v j)) > 0}. (4.2)
This deﬁnition implies G(E, V) is a connected undirected graph, there are no discon-
nected subgraphs. An important edge is also added that represents the Sydney harbour
bridge connecting Northern Sydney with the City of Sydney.
To calculate the distance between vertices vi and v j , the minimum path length (i.e.
the path with the lowest number of edges) between the two vertices is used as edges
are equally weighted: δ(vi,v j) denotes this shortest path. Because the edges have unit
weighting the shortest paths are found using a simple breadth-ﬁrst search. However,
future extensions could consider edge weightings based on metrics such as real distance
between centroids, travel time between centroids, or even adding additional edges for
public transport links. In cases of weighted edges, Dijkstra’s algorithm could be used
to compute δ(vi,v j) instead.
4.1.2 Spatial submarkets
Dwellings are allocated initial prices based on the distribution of recent sales within
their LGA and also populated according to the census data for dwellings in each
LGA. A full description of the process is given in “Appendix I.2”. Households are
also distributed into LGAs based on census data, with renters then moving to LGAs
in which they can afford, as described in “Appendix D”.
The original dwelling list pricing equation from Eq. ( 3.2) is also now updated
to be based on each dwelling’s LGA. Rather than Qh being the average of the 10
most similar quality dwellings in the model, it is the average of the 10 most similar
within the LGA. Likewise, S[t] is the average sold-to-list price ratio for the dwelling’s
LGA (not overall). In this sense,spatial submarkets (LGAs) (Watkins2001) capable of
exhibiting their own dynamics are introduced. Recent research Bangura and Lee (2020)
has shown the importance of submarkets in the Greater Sydney market, so capturing
such microstructure is a key contribution of the proposed approach, as trends can be
localised to speciﬁc submarkets (a feature not prominent in existing ABMs of housing
markets).
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 15
(a) Overview (b) Zoomed
Fig. 2 Probability of viewing a listing based on buyers location (in this case the City of Sydney). Dark red
indicates high probability, and light yellow indicates low probability (colour ﬁgure online)
4.2 Spatial outreach
In an actual housing market, a typical buyer does not review every listing in the
entire city due to the high search costs and desire to live in certain areas. Rather,
the buyer targets particular spatial submarkets, relating to a given area. In particular,
listings immediately around the buyer’s location are likely to be viewed with a higher
probability than listings which are further away.
Therefore, it is unrealistic to assume perfect knowledge in an ABM of the housing
market. To model this imperfect spatial information, we introduce an outreach term
O, which determines the likelihood for a buyer located atvi to view a listing located at
v j , as described by Eq. ( 4.3). According to this expression, the likelihood of viewing
the listing decreases with the distance between the buyer and the listed dwelling. The
outreach factor is illustrated in Fig. 2 for a buyer located in the LGA “City of Sydney”.
O(vi,v j) = 1 − δ(vi,v j)
max
k∈V
δ(vi,v k) (4.3)
While the spatial outreach makes sense for ﬁrst-time home buyers, for investors,
the outreach becomes uniform, as they do not necessarily desire rental properties near
where they reside. So for investors, we use O(vi,v j) = 1,∀i, j .
To control the strength of the outreach, we introduce a new parameter α ∈ (0, 1),
so the probability of viewing a listing Pview(vi,v j) is given in Eq. ( 4.4).
Pview(vi,v j) = α O(vi,v j)2 (4.4)
where α modulates the spatial information on dwelling listings: the higher the α,t h e
more the listings are viewed by a potential buyer. That is, α adjusts the likelihood of
viewing a listing, based on the distance to that listing. The effect α has on resulting
decisions is further discussed in “Appendix L”.
123

16 B. P. Evans et al.
4.3 Spatial FOMO
In the baseline model, dwellings have a ﬁxed probability of being listed, pb = 0.01.
Here, we consider a spatial probability to list a dwelling located in a certain LGA li ,
which depends on the number of recent sales in li . For this, we introduce the “fear of
missing out” (FOMO) parameter, denoted by β, which modulates the probability of
listing a dwelling situated in li by the number of recent sales in li altering the agents’
decision-making behaviour. In particular, if a high number of dwellings inli have been
sold, then the owners of dwellings in li will be more likely to list their dwelling on the
market. This will account for the possibility that if a certain LGA becomes a popular
location for selling a dwelling, the owners of dwellings in this LGA would not want
to miss an opportunity to sell their dwelling.
The spatial listing probability plist(li) is expressed by considering the difference in
the fraction of dwellings currently in li ’s submarket (fli = listingsli /dwellingsli ) with
respect to the Greater Sydney average. A higher fli means dwellings in li have been
less likely to sell in the previous months (since all begin with a ﬁxed probability of
selling pb) compared to the regions average. This spatial listing probability 1 is given
by Eq. ( 4.5).
plist(li) = pb + pbβ
[ fli∑
a∈V fa/|V| − 1
]
(4.5)
The magnitude of β controls the strength of li ’s spatial submarket contribution to
the listing probability. Rewriting Eq. (4.5) by denoting the term in the square brackets
as x, i.e.
pb + pbβx
we see that if both β and x are negative, then the listing probability will be higher than
the baseline level pb. Therefore, if the number of dwellings for sale in a particular
LGA is less than the average in the whole city, this means that this particular LGA ’s
submarket has been clearing fast, and homeowners in this LGA will be more likely
to list their dwelling. In contrast, if x is positive, then dwellings in the current LGA
are not clearing as fast as in the other LGAs, so homeowners in this LGA will be
less likely to list. Conversely, a positive β results in an opposite effect. If an LGA has
comparatively few listings, the homeowner from this LGA will be less likely to list
a dwelling for sale, whereas if this LGA has many listings, the probability to list a
dwelling there increases. In this way, β has a direct effect on the supply of dwelling
listings and alters the decision-making behaviour of sellers.
5 Optimisation and sensitivity analysis
The selection of appropriate parameters is an important step in agent-based modelling,
and in most existing work, parameters are selected over the entire period of interest.
1 plist can technically be < 0o r > 1, so plist is capped to be between 0 and 1, in order to be a true
probability, although this is exceptionally rare and does not appear to occur in Fig. 4.
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 17
Here, we instead adopt a machine learning approach whereby we split the time series
into a training and a testing portion; this ensures the model also performs well for the
unseen (i.e. the testing) portion of data, and avoids biasing the selection of parameters
by considering the entire time period.
We use Bayesian hyperparameter optimisation (Snoek et al. 2012) to ﬁnd appro-
priate combinations of parameters. The training set is used for parameter selection,
whereas the test set is only used to evaluate the goodness of ﬁt of the model after
the optimisation process is completed (in Sect. 6). We stress that the test set is never
seen by the optimisation process. This is an important distinction from previous work
(Glavatskiy et al. 2020), which constructs the models by considering all time points,
and as such cannot be considered true predictions, unlike here where the model can
be seen as a true predictor of future pricing trends. Optimisation details are given in
“Appendix E”.
5.1 Optimisation results
We run several optimisation processes in order to quantify the contribution of each
component on agent decision-making and the effect these decisions have on resulting
market dynamics. Each method follows the same optimisation process.
A “baseline” method is run, where there is only a single area (Greater Sydney),
and only h is optimised for (with perfect knowledge 2 and no β optimisation). A
spatial version of the baseline, with the 38 Greater Sydney LGAs as areas. Again,
only h is optimised for (with perfect knowledge and no β). We then run pairwise
combinations, so h and α, and h and β. We never run without optimisingh,a st h i sw a s
the key decision-making parameter in the original model. Finally, we run the proposed
extensions in their entirety—that is, we optimise over all three parameters ( h, β, and
α). We then apply a global constraint (on the result of the training optimisation) that
2006–2010 must exhibit a peak, with details outlined in “Appendix E.3”. The results
are presented visually in Fig. 3. We also provide additional analysis into the network
architecture itself in “Appendix G”.
Looking at the resulting plots, we can see that with the introduction of each new
component, the resulting values of the loss function 𝓁(see Eq. E.1) over the training
period is reduced at each step, with the proposed extensions achieving the minimal 𝓁,
indicating that the predictions arising from the resulting agent decisions follow more
closely to those in the actual market. From this point forward, we focus on the proposed
extension in its entirety, due to the improved performance in all three periods.
5.2 Resulting parameters
Exploring the entire parameter search space would be computationally prohibitive.
Bayesian optimisation intelligently explores this search space, balancing exploration
and exploitation with the use of an acquisition function allowing more emphasis to
be placed on well-performing or unexplored regions of the space (Shahriari et al.
2 Perfect knowledge in this paper is assumed to mean α = 1, O(vi ,v j ) = 1, i.e. ability to view every
listing across all of Greater Sydney, i.e. M in 4.1.1.
123

18 B. P. Evans et al.
𝓁= 45726) 𝓁= 187549) 𝓁= 459482)
Baseline. No spatial component. Optimising h only.
𝓁= 41613) 𝓁= 100745)
(a) 2006–2010 ( (b) 2011–2015 ( (c) 2016–2019 (
(d) 2006–2010 ( (e) 2011–2015 ( (f) 2016–2019 (𝓁= 392208)
Spatial. Optimising h only.
𝓁= 37523) 𝓁= 81553) 𝓁= 236476)
Spatial. Optimising h and α.
𝓁= 43459) 𝓁= 20321) 𝓁= 23674)
Spatial. Optimising h and β.
𝓁= 39786) 𝓁= 20106) 𝓁= 22492)
Spatial. Optimising h, β and α.
𝓁= 64334) 𝓁= 20106)
(g) 2006–2010 ( (h) 2011–2015 ( (i) 2016–2019 (
(j) 2006–2010 ( (k) 2011–2015 ( (l) 2016–2019 (
(m) 2006–2010 ( (n) 2011–2015 ( (o) 2016–2019 (
(p) 2006–2010 ( (q) 2011–2015 ( (r) 2016–2019 (𝓁= 22492)
Spatial. Optimising h, β and α with global constraint in 2006–2010.
Fig. 3 Optimisation of the goodness of ﬁt for dwelling prices across all models (for the training period).
The orange lines are from the SIRCA–CoreLogic data (the solid line represents the rolling median, and
the dotted line represents the month-to-month median). The black line shows the best ﬁtted path from the
model
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 19
(a) 2006–2010
(b) 2011–2015
(c) 2016–2019
Fig. 4 Univariate parameter analysis. The x-axis represents the parameter value, and the y-axis represents
the loss (with logarithmic colours for consistency across the various loss plots). The other parameters are
averaged over to provide the one-dimensional view (colour ﬁgure online)
2015). The resulting exploration is visualised in Fig. 12. From this, we can see the
regions of interest, with dark sections indicating areas with the lowest loss𝓁(and more
sample points being present in such areas). We can see the search space is fairly well
explored in all cases, with obvious regions of well-performing parameter combinations
(pairwise combinations are visualised in Fig. 13). While the 3D plot gives a high-level
overview, it is difﬁcult to visualise the contribution of each component. To facilitate
this, we present a ﬂattened one-dimensional view of each parameter, where the results
123

20 B. P. Evans et al.
Table 1 Selected ABM
parameters from the training
period with Bayesian
optimisation, rounded to 2
decimal places
2006–2010 2011–2015 2016–2019
h − 0.80 − 0.11 − 0.005
β 0.08 − 1.03 − 2.73
α 0.28 0 .59 0 .24
are averaged over the other 2 parameters to view the loss for 1 parameter at a time.
This is shown in Fig. 4. From these plots, it can be seen how each parameter behaves
in isolation (noting that such plots do not capture the parameter interactions). The
selected ABM parameters (the ones which had the lowest 𝓁) are presented in Table 1.
A sensitivity analysis for the parameters is performed in “Appendix F”.
The parameter search space is uniform across the ranges given in Table 3,s oa n
uninformative parameter would be sampled uniformly as well (since there would be
no Bayesian preference the sampling would be approximately uniformly random);
instead, we see clear unimodal peaks in almost all cases in Fig. 13, with the h and β
parameters being normally distributed around the optimal value found, and α with a
clear peak but non-normally distributed. This indicates each parameter seems to have
a useful range, which is further veriﬁed in the sensitivity analysis in “Appendix F”.
h: Recall that the HPI aptitude h directly inﬂuences the agents’ bid price [given in
Eq. (3.1)] and serves as the key trend-following parameter in the original model. We
can see the value of h controls the contribution of the HPI over the previous year and
as such it affects the bid price based on the markets state. This relationship depends
on both the current HPI and the yearly difference in /Delta1HPI.
The absolute value of h controls the magnitude of the contribution, and we can
see 2006–2010 had the highest contribution indicating the largest market effect on
bidding. In the original model, h also had a large magnitude but the opposite sign. The
value for 2011–2015, h =− 0.11, is very close to that chosen in the original model
h =− 0.10, which reﬂects the relatively consistent price dynamics, with agents mostly
ignoring the market trend.
Interestingly, in 2016–2019, the chosen h is near zero. This means the denominator
of Eq. ( 3.1) simpliﬁes to:
φM[t]+ φh − h ∗ /Delta1HPI[t]≃ φM[t]+ φH
meaning the price is dependent on the mortgage rate and homeownership rate, as φH
is set based on the current value of HPI, this means the historical values are not being
used, and instead, a much more “forgetful” market based only on the previous month’s
HPI is used for setting the price, with agents paying less attention to historical trends.
The HPI aptitude h also has clear optimal ranges for each period, with 2006–2010 in
the range [−0.75... 0], 2011–2015 in the range [−0.5... 0.25] (which are of similar
widths), and 2016–2019 in the much narrower range [−0.2 ... 0.05]. We can see a
sharp transition occurring in 2016–2019 around 0.1, in which case the loss begins
increasing drastically for any higher values.
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 21
β: This parameter (the right-hand column in Fig. 4) exhibits a very sharp transition
around 0 for all years. This is because β has a direct relation to the supply and demand
in the model, which drastically changes the dynamics based on the availability of
properties. We see increasing contributions of β throughout the years, with 2016–
2019 indicating the highest levels of β. This is perhaps reﬂective of the market, where
people are increasingly following trends when it comes to the decision to sell a dwelling
(perhaps an indicator of a “bursting” bubble, with a large cascading sell-off). This
indicates sharper peaks and dips are likely to occur in the future, with decision-making
being made increasingly under the pressure of social inﬂuence.
α: This parameter does not present as clear of a transition, or deﬁned range of
optimal vales as h or β. This indicates the value ofα has less of an impact on the results
when compared to h and β (as is conﬁrmed in the sensitivity analysis in “Appendix
F”). The likely reason for this is since the buyer always attempts to purchase the most
expensive viewed dwelling, the varying levels of α do not have as large of an effect
on the outcome as the other parameters, since the most expensive dwellings still have
a higher preference. Discussion on the effect α has on agent utilities and decisions is
given in “Appendix L”.
We can see a general preference towards various α ranges for each period, based
on higher density of samples in these areas. The preference is never for “perfect”
information, i.e. α = 1, reinforcing that such agents often act in a boundedly rational
manner (with α< 1). In the 2006–2010 period, there is a general preference towards
sampling lower levels of α (within ≈[ 0.05,... 0.3], with the optimal value being
0.28), resulting in buyers acting with less information. In 2011–2015, during the
economic recovery in Australia, buyers may have been more cautious and considering
a wider range of available dwellings when purchasing, reﬂected in higher values of α
(≈[ 0.5,... 0.7], with the optimised value being 0.59). In 2016–2019, the cautiousness
of buyers appears to revert again (within ≈[ 0.05,... 0.3], with optimised value of
0.24), showing buyers making less “informed” choices perhaps due to the rapidly
increasing dwelling prices and buyer’s desires to partake, at the expense of making
“optimal” choices with larger α values.
6 Results
In this section, we present results of ABM simulations in terms of (i) price forecasting
over three historic periods, aligned with the Australian Census years (2006, 2011 and
2016), and (ii) resultant agent preferences in terms of household mobility patterns.
We also identify market trends across the three periods. The considered periods 2006–
2010 and 2011–2015 include 48 months, while the contemporary period, 2016–2019,
covers 42 months (our SIRCA–CoreLogic dataset includes the market data until 31
December 2019). Each time period compromises a separate set of simulations (with
varying optimised parameters). Discussion on the chosen time periods is given in
“Appendix I.3”. For each period, we run 100 Monte Carlo simulations, using the model
parameters optimised for the corresponding training set, as described in Sect. 5, and
then obtain predictions for the remaining (testing) part of the data. For the ﬁrst two
periods, the ﬁrst 3
4 of the time series is the training part (e.g. 36 months from 1 July
123

22 B. P. Evans et al.
Fig. 5 Actual trends of Greater Sydney house prices from June 2006 to December 2019. Source: SIRCA–
CoreLogic. The orange line represents the rolling mean, and the red line the rolling median. The raw monthly
data points are also visualised (dotted lines). We use the median price trend as a more robust measure in all
cases in this paper
2006 to 30 June 2009), and the remaining 1
4 is the testing portion not used by any
optimisation process (e.g. 12 months from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010). For the last
period, the training part includes 30 months (from 1 July 2016 to 31 December 2018),
with the remaining 12 months of 2019 used for testing.
6.1 Price forecasting
We visualise the forecasting results in Fig. 6. It is evident that the model can success-
fully capture the key trends across the entire time series as emerging from individual
buy and sell decisions, correctly identifying the peak and dip in 2006–2010, the steady
growth during 2011–2015, and the growth and slow decline in 2016–2019.
The time period beginning in 2006 was a period of substantial uncertainty, triggered
by the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Tracing predictions for the last quarter of the
period (i.e. the testing part of the dataset), shown in Fig. 6a, d, we observe that the
average market rebound pattern is not fully followed. However, when considering the
range of the simulations runs, i.e. the possibilistic regions of the simulation (as deﬁned
by Edmonds and ní Aodha ( 2018), and visualised by the blue boundaries in Fig. 6),
we see that these contain the ﬁrst segment of the fast rebound, and capture the market
recovery to a good degree. In other words, the model is able to show the possibility
of such a rebound. The discrepancy indicates that there was a catalyst underpinning a
signiﬁcant price appreciation during 2010 that was not solely driven by social inﬂuence
and endogenous regulatory factors such as interest rates. It is well accepted that the
market was reignited in 2009–2010 by exogenous factors, most notably by post-GFC
government stimulus initiatives, such as the First Home Owners Boost (Randolph et al.
2013).
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 23
(a) Median: 2006–2010 (b) Median: 2011–2015 (c) Median: 2016–2019
(d) Mean: 2006–2010 (e) Mean: 2011–2015 (f) Mean: 2016–2019
Fig. 6 ABM simulation predictions. The top row shows the median of the simulations (black lines), every
individual run (blue lines), and the minimum and maximum of every run with the light blue ﬁll. The bottom
row shows the mean of the simulations (black line), and ± 1 and 2 standard deviations (dark blue and light
blue respectively). The vertical dashed lines separate training and testing parts of the time series. The orange
lines show the actual trend obtained from SIRCA–CoreLogic data (colour ﬁgure online)
For the period beginning in 2011, the predicted time series correctly follows the
actual trend, while slightly underestimating the slope of the growth towards the end
of the period, as shown in Fig. 6b, e. It can be argued that the social inﬂuence factors,
estimated during the optimisation phase, continue to affect the market dynamics during
the last quarter of the period. In other words, the inﬂuence of these factors on decision-
making, coupled with endogenous factors (e.g. interest rates), results in a steady growth
of the market, predicted until the end of the period.
In the last considered period, starting in 2016, the model captures both the testing
and training portions very well, correctly predicting the dip from 2019 onward, as
shown in Fig. 6c, f. The notable decline occurs only in the testing period, and yet, the
model is able to accurately predict both the peak and the correction. This indicates
that the underlying reasons for the market reversal have developed during the ﬁrst part
of the period, and have been adequately captured by the parameter optimisation.
Overall, in all three time periods, the possibilistic output of the model contains
most of the actual market dynamics. Speciﬁcally, during 2006–2010, 96% of the
actual monthly prices are within the possibilistic range boundaries of the simulation
(i.e. between the minimum and maximum output for each time period, the top row in
Fig. 6), for 2011–2015: 84%, and 2016–2019: 100%. When using the mean ± 1( 2 )
123

24 B. P. Evans et al.
standard deviations (bottom row in Fig. 6) as possibilistic boundaries, we observed
the following probabilities of falling within the boundaries, during 2006–2010: 78%
(92%), 2011–2015: 27% (63%), and 2016–2019: 86% (100%).
6.2 Area-specific price forecasting
The model was not directly optimised for spatial submarkets. However, in this section,
we evaluate the predictive capacity of the model in terms of area-speciﬁc forecasting.
During initialisation, some area-speciﬁc information for LGAs is drawn from available
distributions, for example, the recent sale price of dwellings in that LGA. Likewise,
households are also distributed into LGAs based on the actual population sizes of the
LGAs. However, no additional optimisation is applied across different LGAs with
respect to actual area-speciﬁc trends. In other words, the spatial component is used
only for initialising relevant distributions, leaving the market dynamics to develop
through agent-to-agent interactions.
In Fig. 7, we visualise the predicted area-speciﬁc pricing at the end of the testing
period. We can see that these predictions closely follow actual data in general, despite
not being directly optimised for, with all predictions characterised by high R2 values.
For the period 2006–2010 (with the end of the testing period mapping to June
2010), the simulations slightly overestimate the ﬁnal price of the cheaper LGAs, but
underestimate the resulting price of the most expensive LGAs, as shown in Fig. 7a.
However, the perfect model (orange line) tends to be within the error margin (standard
deviation) of the predictions of the simulation.
For 2011–2015 (with the end of the testing period being June 2015), the slopes of
both actual and predicted regressions are almost identical ( m = 0.98), as shown in
Fig. 7b. However, the additive constant of the regression (i.e. y-axis intercept) for the
predicted line is greater than 0 (of the perfect model): as a result, we are predicting
slightly higher values across the LGAs on average. Considering the LGAs that were
most overpriced with respect to the spatial trend (such as Kuringai, Waverly, Northern
Beaches, and North Sydney), we can compare their resultant predicted prices in June
2015, Fig. 7b, with the actual prices depicted in Fig. 7c. The 2016–2019 plots show
that this growth did eventually happen, and so the simulations produced for 2011–2015
merely predicted this appreciation for an earlier time than the actual scenario.
The predictions for the period 2016–2019 (the end of the testing period: December
2019) produce a regression strongly aligned with the actual ﬁt, particularly for the
higher-priced LGAs. Again, there is some overestimation in the cheaper LGAs, but
this seems to highlight the increasing popularity of these suburbs. Analogously to the
previous period, this may be indicative of some future price growth for these areas,
not yet reﬂected in the current actual pricing.
Overall, we observe that the resulting area-speciﬁc price predictions at the end of
each testing period ﬁt closely to the actual resulting prices. This indicates that the
model successfully captured the spatial submarkets, despite having been optimised
for the overall market dynamics of the Greater Sydney region as a whole.
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 25
Fig. 7 Predicted LGA pricing at
the end of the testing period.
The actual prices
(SIRCA–CoreLogic) are shown
on the x-axis, with the predicted
prices on the y-axis. Error bars
represent the standard deviation
of the prediction across
simulation runs. The orange line
shows the perfect model
(y = x), and the blue line shows
the least-squares line of best ﬁt
for the predictions (equation
given on plot) (colour ﬁgure
online)
(a)
(b)
(c)
6.3 Agent preferences and mobility patterns
Analysing the households’ movements produced by the simulation is another key
insight the spatial agent-based model can provide. In this section, we consider various
agent movement patterns (which we refer to as household mobility), aiming to iden-
tify the salient trends in agent preferences. There are several key areas we focus on:
123

26 B. P. Evans et al.
(a) First-time home buyers (b) Overseas Investors (c) Local Investors
Fig. 8 Comparison of price inﬂuenced mobility between the three periods. The x-axis represents the afford-
ability (most affordable locations on the left). They-axis represents the (smoothed) percentage of movements
to the area. Darker colours represent later years. A full breakdown of household mobility is provided in
“Appendix J”
ﬁrst-time home buyers, investors, and new households (i.e. migrations or households
splitting). Again, no direct optimisation was applied to the movements, and so the iden-
tiﬁed preferences are intrinsic results of the model, and not attributed to some actual
data. However, we show that such mobility preferences are supported by evidence,
thus arguing that the model is able to produce sensible local patterns for which it was
not explicitly optimised for, based only on the global calibration data and proposed
spatial structure.
The mechanisms shaping the process of settlement formation and generating intra-
urban mobility speciﬁcally include transitions driven by critical social dynamics,
transformations of labour markets, changes in transport networks, as well as other
infrastructural developments (Kim et al. 2005; Simini et al. 2012; Barthelemy et al.
2013; Louf and Barthelemy 2013; Arcaute et al. 2016; Barthelemy 2016; Crosato et al.
2018; Barbosa et al. 2018; Piovani et al. 2018; Slavko et al. 2019; Barthelemy 2019).
Types of homeownership, in particular, are known to affect mobility patterns (Crosato
et al. 2021). In this work, we focus solely on the movements resulting from the hous-
ing market dynamics, which in turn incorporate the imperfect spatial information and
other subjective factors such as the FOMO and trend-following aptitude. We do not
model any structural changes across the regions, i.e. the LGAs boundaries, transport
and other infrastructure topologies, remain ﬁxed.
6.3.1 New households/migrations
New households are those which are added throughout the simulation based on the
projected household growth. New households can result from a variety of sources,
such as people moving to Greater Sydney (migration), or households from Greater
Sydney splitting, e.g. in the case of divorce or young adults moving out of home. We
make no distinction between the two types in the simulation, and for simplicity, refer
to both intercity and intra-city migration types as migrants.
The most common LGAs into which the new households move are shown in
Fig. 22.3 The simulation produces a clear trend for migration towards the cheaper
3 All movements are scaled by the population size to allow a fair comparison, as outlined in “Appendix J”.
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 27
areas, as the price begins to increase throughout the Greater Sydney region over time.
This is most apparent for the 2016–2019 period, during which we can detect only a
minority of the new households that purchased a dwelling in the expensive areas upon
moving to the Greater Sydney. This is markedly different when in comparison with the
2006–2010 period. Furthermore, there is a clear peak in the more affordable LGAs,
comprising Western Sydney (such as Campbelltown, Penrith, Blacktown, Fairﬁeld,
and Liverpool), and LGAs further away from the metropolitan area (such as Central
Coast, Lake Macquarie, and Hawkesbury). A similar trend can be seen with the new
renters. This agrees with the discussion in Bangura and Lee ( 2019), which names
Western Sydney as “the ﬁrst port of call for new arrivals, immigrants and refugees”.
This observations also agree with the study of Slavko et al. ( 2020a), which shows the
outward sprawl from the densely populated Sydney metropolitan area.
6.3.2 First-time home buyers
Homeownership has long been a goal of many Australians (Bessant and Johnson2013),
so simulating the forecasted feasibility in Sydney—the largest and most expensive
(Y etsenga and Emmett2020), Australian city—is essential. The ﬁrst-time home buyers
are deﬁned here as those who have resided in Sydney but have previously been renters,
and then purchased their own dwelling. This is in contrast to the analysis in Sect.6.3.1,
where the new owners are deﬁned as those that had just entered the simulation (by
moving to Sydney).
The ﬁrst home purchases are visualised in Fig. 24. The main diagonal represents
an agent purchasing in the same LGA as the one where the household is currently
renting. The area below the main diagonal (which we refer to as lower triangle) shows
households purchasing in cheaper LGAs in comparison with those where they are
renting, and the area above the main diagonal (the upper triangle) shows the agents
purchasing in LGAs more expensive than those where they are currently renting. In the
earlier years (i.e. the 2006–2010 period), we can see that the densities in the heatmaps
are relatively evenly distributed. Over time, however, the density of the upper triangle
begins to decrease, meaning that the agents are purchasing in the LGAs cheaper than
those where they are renting, as the expensive LGAs become increasingly out of reach.
This is also reﬂected in Fig. 8a: a comparison between the 2006–2010 and the 2016–
2019 periods clearly shows that many suburbs are simply becoming out of reach for
the ﬁrst-time home buyers, with a larger percentage of them needing to purchase in
the more affordable areas.
This result is in line with (Randolph et al.2013) which shows the distribution of First
Home Owner Grants within Sydney statistical districts, over the period 2000–2010,
pointing out that such grants were increasingly likely in the lower-income housing
markets, such as Western and Southern Sydney. Likewise, in La Cava et al. ( 2017), it
is shown that the average distance to the CBD of dwellings that ﬁrst-time home buyers
can afford has been increasing from 2006 through 2016. Furthermore, La Cava et al.
(2017) show that the purchasing capacity of ﬁrst-time home buyers has been limited
to the bottom (i.e. most affordable) 10–30% of dwellings, where in 2016 the median
ﬁrst-time home buyer could afford only around 10% of the available dwellings. A
similar conclusion is reached in Kupke and Rossini ( 2011) which ﬁnd key workers
123

28 B. P. Evans et al.
being able to afford fewer dwellings and commute longer distances between 2001 and
2009, a trend which seems to have been followed ever since, as shown by the mobility
patterns here.
6.3.3 Investors
Investors are deﬁned as households which own multiple dwellings, or households
which live overseas yet own a property in Greater Sydney. We make an explicit distinc-
tion between local (residing in Sydney) and overseas investors, since price increases
within Sydney are often attributed to the latter category (Rogers et al. 2015, 2017;
Wong2017; Guest and Rohde2017). This distinction is visualised in Fig.23. The over-
seas investment approvals are regulated by the Australian government, and details of
the approval data are provided in “Appendix K”.
During the 2006–2010 period, based on the overseas approvals granted, the simu-
lation produces a clear preference for the overseas buyers towards the most expensive
regions, purchasing properties almost exclusively in the highest priced regions. In
later periods, we begin to observe a relatively wider range of preference, although
still with a clear trend towards the mid-high-range areas. This is reﬂected in Fig. 8b.
A driving factor behind this is the higher average government approval for overseas
investment given during 2006–2007 years, in comparison with later years, reﬂected
in our simulation (as displayed in Fig. 25). While the foreign investment data in the
Greater Sydney housing market is sparse and not ﬁne-grained, this purchasing pattern
is in concordance with the recent literature. For example, the study of (Gauder et al.
2014) mentions that foreign investors tend to prefer inner-city dwellings within Syd-
ney (which tend to correspond to higher-priced LGAs); however, recently “foreign
investment has started to broaden out into other areas of Sydney”.
These ﬁndings are in sharp contrast to mobility patterns of the local investors, for
which the simulation produces a far wider distribution across areas. For 2011–2015,
and 2016–2019 periods, the most expensive LGAs become out of reach for local
investors, which is most apparent during 2016–2019 (as shown in Fig. 8c). Local
investors can be seen buying properties in many of the cheaper LGAs, which also
falls in line with the simulation showing many renters in these areas. Due to the
affordability, these LGAs also exhibit higher population growth rates than other areas.
This also agrees with existing studies, for example (Pawson and Martin 2020), which
ﬁnd that many high-income Australian landlords are investing in dwellings in lower
socioeconomically developed regions of Sydney.
7 Conclusions and future work
In this work, we have introduced a spatial element to a model of a large, well-developed
housing market (the Greater Sydney region) using an adjacency matrix based on the
spatial composition of the city, and introduced several factors which affect agent
decision-making within the market. We have shown the model is capable of predicting
housing price dynamics as arising from individual buy and sell decisions in the market.
The proposed model is capable of capturing a large variety of spatial topologies, for
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 29
example, monocentric and polycentric cities. Furthermore, the graph-based approach
is ﬂexible allowing for any level of granularity, for example, over the differing scales
of countries, cities, or suburbs, and extendable to weighted versions which could
incorporate transport times between areas.
Using this model, we have demonstrated the usefulness of spatial analysis when
it is calibrated to the Australian house price data for the Greater Sydney region. The
38 LGAs of Greater Sydney were simulated, and agents (households) were calibrated
based on the LGA in which they live. We have shown that the spatial component allows
an additional level of ﬁne-tuning that results in better overall ﬁtting of the model to
data, as well as producing strong out-of-sample predictions for each individual LGA
by optimising only for the overall trend. That is, spatial areas add an additional layer
of predictions, while also improving the overall aggregate trend.
We investigated the agent’s spatial awareness of the market, where buyers only have
limited knowledge of the market, based on the area in which they reside (imperfect
spatial information). We demonstrated through varying α (a parameter that controls
how much of the market each agent is able to perceive) that lower values ofα capture the
true trend better than perfect (whole of market) knowledge, indicating the usefulness
of modelling this imperfect spatial information in a housing market and showing that
agents often act in a boundedly rational manner.
The spatial component also allows for the analysis of agent preferences in terms
of movement patterns, where we have shown differences in mobility and purchase
locations between various agent types, for example differences between ﬁrst-time
home buyers and investors, where ﬁrst-time home buyers are limited to the more
affordable locations, with investors being able to purchase higher-priced properties,
and likewise between local and overseas investors, where overseas investors are shown
to have a strong preference towards mid to high valued areas. We also model new
migrations to the city, showing such agents becoming increasingly pushed towards
cheaper areas of the city.
We have also introduced a novel fear of missing out component which alters sellers
decision-making behaviour. With this parameter, we model how sellers become more
likely to sell a listing if many surrounding listings have recently sold, and show a
strongly localised fear of missing out occurring throughout the market. This indicates
agents’ decisions are often motivated by their neighbour’s decisions rather than by
strict optimisation of their own beneﬁts, i.e. real households are only partially rational
in this regard.
While in this work we addressed some key concerns in a housing market, there
are still several areas of improvement we would like to focus on in future work. The
spatial component opens up a range of additional possibilities, such as overlaying
public transport maps on the network, allowing for the distance to key work areas,
schools, beaches, etc., and further modelling and capturing agent mobility within the
simulation. The demographics and household types could be sampled from actual data,
which would allow analysis into subgroups of people (i.e. young singles vs. retirees
vs. families), and allow us to model any spatial trends that arise between demographic
groups. The internal optimisation functions (for example, what neighbourhood to
move to, what kind of dwelling to choose) of agents could also be investigated further,
as currently, agents will purchase the most expensive dwelling they can afford based
123

30 B. P. Evans et al.
on their knowledge and outreach. There are also three key equations which drive the
model that could be further investigated: the bid prices, the listing prices, and the bank
approval process. These are currently predeﬁned equations but they could be treated
as optimisation problems themselves, ﬁnding expressions that match most closely to
the training period.
A: Implementation
The model is written from scratch in Python3, based on the C++ code from Glavatskiy
et al. (2020).
B: Baseline model parameters
The work extends the model of Glavatskiy et al. ( 2020) (the baseline). For complete-
ness, all parameters of the baseline method with explanations are given in Table 2.
Local sensitivity analysis of these parameters is presented in Fig. 9, where we vary
the internal values around their default ranges (within a range of ±20%) one at a
time while keeping the other parameters at their default values. The resulting analysis
shows the model is robust to small changes in the parameters. The only parameters
that stand out from the analysis deserving additional discussion are the listing price
factor, the expectation downshift ratio, and the amount quality reference.
The listing price factor b𝓁 has relatively large variation in prices, but as shown in
Eq. (3.2) this is because it acts as a linear scaler on the list prices, so scales the output
within the ±20% range too, which means the parameter is behaving as expected. The
expectation downshift ratio pd highlights the willingness of agents to downgrade the
pre-purchase expectation based on the amount offered by the bank. For higher values,
this indicates buyers wanting more from banks, and we see this increases prices overall.
It is interesting to note, however, that higher values also increase the volatility of the
market, with larger ﬂuctuations seen for example in late 2017 (at the peak of the
market). This conﬁrms the discussion in the study of Glavatskiy et al. ( 2020) which
highlighted the propensity to borrow as a key explanatory factor of volatility. For
the amount quality reference ¯Qh, this is an integer parameter which explains why
there are fewer comparison lines than the continuous parameters, but we still observe
well-behaved outputs in the ±20% range.
For all other parameters, the outputs only result in small variations from the default
value indicating the robustness of the model to variations around the internal param-
eters.
C: market matching
The market matching process where buyers and sellers are matched is relatively simple
and given in Algorithm 1. We can see the highest bidding buyer gets preference to
the listings, and every buyer attempts to purchase the most expensive listing they can
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 31
Table 2 Baseline model parameters
Parameter Symbol V alue
External paramaters
Mortgage rate φM 2006–2010: 7.3–9.45%
2011–2015: 5.53–7.79%
2016–2019: 4.95–5.35%
Tax rate 2006–2010: 0%, 15%, 30%, 40%, 45%
2011–2015: 0%, 15%, 30%, 37%, 45%
2016–2019: 0%, 19%, 32.5%, 37%, 45%
Tax brackets 2006–2010: $0, $6k, $25k, $75k, $150k
2011–2015: $0, $6k, $37k, $80k, $180k
2016–2019: $0, $18.2k, $37k, $87k, $180k
Income expenditure φI,φ b 2006–2010: [49.37, 0.81]
2011–2015: [76.76, 0.75]
2016–2019: [81.75, 0.80]
Mortgage duration 30 years
Annual house tax and fees 1.7%
Stamp duty 2.5%
House care φH 2.5% ± 0.5%
Purchase fees 2.5%
Loan to value ratio 80% ± 10%
Income growth rate 1 .002 ± 0.001
Income consumption 60%
Liquid consumption 2.5%
Internal paramaters
Listing probability pb 1%
Amount of houses for reference Qh 10
List price factor b𝓁 1.75
Sold to list power bs 0.22
Months on market power bd − 0.01
Urgency stress 0.2
Urgency rental 0.02
Urgency cash 0.2
Probability of accepting highest bidder pm 80%
Expectation downshift ratio pd 60%
The external parameters are exogenous, sourced from, the Australian Bureau of Statistics, The Household,
Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia Survey (Wilkins and Lass 2015). The internal parameters are
endogenous, and the default values tend to come from the analysis of (Axtell et al.2014). Sensitivity analysis
around the internal parameters is given in Fig. 9, and a full outline is given in Glavatskiy et al. ( 2020)
123

32 B. P. Evans et al.
Fig. 9 Local sensitivity analysis showing variation in output based on varying the baseline model input
parameters one at a time ±20% around their default value (with others ﬁxed at their default). The red lines
represent the output for the default value, and the grey lines represent for the varying values (with shade
indicating the distance to the default, black meaning very near the default, and light grey being further away).
All show relatively small variations in the output based on the input parameters, indicating the robustness
of the parameters (colour ﬁgure online)
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 33
afford. In certain cases, deals are rejected due to external inﬂuences (modelled by a
random 20% chance of rejection). This matching process is performed once every
simulation step, with bids and listings that did not clear persisting into the next step.
Algorithm 1 Market Matching
1: procedure match(bids , listings )
2: sort bids ⊿ From highest bid price to lowest
3: sort listings ⊿ From highest list price to lowest
4: for bidder in bids do
5: best listing ← max listing buyer can afford
6: if no deal breaker then
7: Make deal between buyer and seller
8: listings − best listing ⊿ Remove this listing from the available listings
9: end if
10: end for
11: endp rocedure
D: Rental market
In the baseline model, there was no concept of rental matching. Households were
randomly assigned a rental, with no regard to the cost of the dwelling or income of
the household. Here, we add in an additional matching process based on the idea that
households should spend maximum 30% of their income on housing when possible
to avoid housing stress (Thomas and Hall 2016; Fernald 2020).
New households are randomly assigned a “local” area (weighted by the population
of each area), where they begin and have their characteristics (wealth, income, cash
ﬂow, etc.) assigned. From there, every household attempts to ﬁnd a vacant rental in
their price range (which will likely result in various households moving out of ﬁnancial
requirements). Households with extremely high incomes, where all dwellings are less
than 10% of their income, get the most expensive rental available. Households with
extremely low income, where all dwellings are at least 30% of their income, get the
cheapest one they can afford. All other households randomly choose a rental they can
afford (in the 10–30% of income range).
Households remain in their rentals for the duration of the simulation. In this work,
we do not attempt to capture the rental market in its entirety and leave this for future
work where we would like to model the relationship between renters and investors.
The changes were made to ensure the cash ﬂow situations of each household match
closer to those seen in the real world, where in the previous model many households
would be in a poor cash ﬂow situation due to the rental price. Other work such as Mc
Breen (2010) looks more in depth at modelling the rental market.
123

34 B. P. Evans et al.
E: Bayesian optimisation
E.1 Details
Bayesian optimisation is performed using the Tree of Parzen Estimators approach
with hyperopt from Bergstra et al. ( 2013). The optimisation process was run for 2000
iterations in all cases. The loss was measured as the average loss over several stochastic
runs for each set of parameters, to minimise the effect of randomisation in the model
and resulting loss.
E.2 Loss function
For measuring the goodness of ﬁt, we use a loss function with two terms—a shape
and temporal term to try and capture the nonlinearities overtime when predicting
housing price trends. This loss function is a modiﬁcation of DILA TE (Vincent and
Thome 2019) which was introduced as a loss function for neural networks for time
series predictions, although DILA TE has been simpliﬁed here (with the removal of
smoothing parameters) as Bayesian optimisation does not require the loss function to
be differentiable.
The loss function is given in Eq. ( E.1).
𝓁= λ ∗ shape + (1 − λ) ∗ temporal (E.1)
λ = 0.5 was used throughout since this was the most common in the original paper
of Vincent and Thome ( 2019). However, as the terms are not normalised, the two do
not have an equal contribution; instead, the temporal term serves more like a penalty
on the shape (with λ controlling the strength of the penalty).
The shape term is based on dynamic time warping (DTW) which has commonly
been used in speech recognition tasks (Sakoe and Chiba 1978; Myers et al. 1980)
and, however, has a wide range of applications in time series data (Berndt and Clifford
1994). Dynamic time warping can be expressed recursively as a minimisation problem
as in Eq. ( E.2)
shape = DTW = d(x, y) + min
⎡
⎣
DTW(x − 1, y),
DTW(x − 1, y − 1),
DTW(x, y − 1)
⎤
⎦ (E.2)
This can be read as minimising the cumulative distance (using distance measure d,
in this case, euclidean distance) on some warped path between x and y, by taking the
distance between the current elements and the minimum of the cumulative distances
of neighbouring points.
Unlike the common applications in speech recognition, where words can be spo-
ken at varying speeds (so the peaks do not necessarily match up), in ﬁnancial markets,
timing such peaks is important. This motivates the introduction of a temporal term,
for trying to align such peaks and dips. The temporal term is based on Time Distortion
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 35
(a) Shifted Predictions (b) Linear Predictions
Fig. 10 Motivation of time series-based loss using a constructed example. We can see the line on the right
is a very poor predictor of the true trend, failing to capture any of the peaks or dips. However, the MSE is
signiﬁcantly lower than the line on the left. DTW captures the shifts, and incorporating a penalty on time
can penalise these shifts. The light grey lines show how DTW matches points together, even if they do not
occur at the same time period
Index (TDI) (Frías-Paredes et al. 2016, 2017), which can be thought of as the nor-
malised area between the optimal path and the identity path (where the identify path
is (1, 1), (2, 2).., (N, N)) (V allance et al. 2017) and aims to minimise the impact of
shifting and distortion in time series forecasting (Frías-Paredes et al. 2016).
Pl =
∫ il+1
il
(
x − (x − il)( jl+1 − jl)
(il+1 − il) + jl
)
dx (E.3)
temporal = TDI = 2 ∑ |Pl
N 2 (E.4)
To see the usefulness over a more standard approach loss function such as MSE for
time series, consider the example in Fig. 10. We can see the MSE can be a problematic
approach, and in some cases (as in the example where the linear line Fig.10b has a lower
loss) be a misleading measure of goodness of ﬁt. DTW helps to match points in the
two time series, while TDI helps minimise the offset of the predictions. (Graphically,
in the example this corresponds to shortening the dotted grey lines.) For a full analysis,
we refer you to the original DILA TE paper of Vincent and Thome (2019), noting that
all smoothing terms have been removed in the modiﬁcation here.
E.3 Global constraints
We can see 2011–2015 and 2016–2019 ﬁt the trend very closely, although despite
having a low loss, the 2006–2010 simulation path does not follow the dip well, as no
distinction is made about being above or below the trend in the loss function. Looking
123

36 B. P. Evans et al.
(a) Without Constraints (b) Red shows the paths
which will be removed.
(c) Paths matching con-
straint
Fig. 11 Global constraint process
at the individual paths from every run, we can see that a peak and dip is predicted in
many of the cases, although the distance is greater than the path with the lowest loss
which was perfectly matching across a large portion of the training data but missing
the dip. We apply a post-optimisation global constraint to 2006–2010, again only using
this training period, that the midpoint of the simulation must be higher than the start
and ending points (i.e. a peak must occur), and take the parameters with the lowest
loss matching this criterion. The process is shown in Fig. 11 and the result is shown in
Fig. 5p. We can see for 2006–2010, the 𝓁is higher than before the constraint, however,
clearly, the constraint allows for a closer overall trend following in the training period.
The visualisation in Fig. 11 can also begin to show the wide range of possible market
outcomes, for various combinations of the parameters. If a certain section occurs from
many parameter outcomes (i.e. with the peak), we can deduce that such dynamics
were likely to occur just due to the agent characteristics, regardless of the parameters
used. This shows many combinations lead to a peak and dip, perhaps due to mortgage
rates and worrying mortgage vs income ratios. This is more in line with suggestions
in Edmonds and ní Aodha ( 2018), which suggest ABMs be used to determine a range
of potential future outcomes, which in this case shows a variety of paths leading to a
peak and dip.
E.4 Parameter space
The parameter space is deﬁned in Table 3.
Even though there are only three parameters to tune, the number of potential com-
binations exceeds 4 million (this is assuming values are discretised values, so the true
number is far greater), making a grid search impractical.
The three parameters are h, α, and β.
F: Sensitivity analysis
While in Sect. 5.1 we analysed the contribution of each new component by comparing
the resulting optimised time series after introducing the components one at a time,
here we verify and rank the importance of each of the contributions explicitly using
global sensitivity analysis (GSA).
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 37
Table 3 Three tunable hyperparameters
Search space Explanation
α [0, 1] Probability of viewing a listing, scaled by the outreach
β [−10, +10] The contribution of surrounding listing sales when considering selling a dwelling
h [−1, +1] Trend-following aptitude
All parameters are sampled uniformly within these ranges
123

38 B. P. Evans et al.
(a) 2006–2010 (b) 2011–2015 (c) 2016–2019
Fig. 12 Search space exploration. Colour indicates the loss
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 13 Parameter interactions and parameter sampling
Table 4 Morris method for sensitivity analysis
2006–2010 2011–2015 2016–2019
μ∗ σμ ∗ σμ ∗ σ
h 692,019 708,678 1 ,390,890 1 ,693,784 871,388 882,436
β 434,626 843,830 714 ,507 961 ,618 623,839 650,213
α 317,806 573,236 467 ,376 729 ,330 325,056 475,900
Speciﬁcally, we analyse the importance of the trend-following aptitude ( h), the
social contribution (β), and the role of α in minimising the loss function.
We use the Morris method (Morris 1991) for a GSA and present the revised μ∗ as
suggested in Saltelli et al. ( 2004) and σ . μ∗ represents the mean absolute elementary
effect and can be used to rank the contribution of each parameter, and this solves the
problem of μ where elementary effects can cancel out. We also analyse σ , i.e. the
standard deviation of the elementary effects, as a measure of the interactions.
For parameters for the Morris Method, we use r = 20 trajectories, p = 10 levels,
and step size /Delta1= p/[2( p − 1)], i.e. /Delta1≈ 0.52 with p = 10. These are within the
range of commonly used parameters, e.g. in Campolongo et al. ( 2007).
The results are presented in Table 4, and visualised in Figs. 15 and 14.
Checking the importance of each parameter, or μ⋆, we can see h consistently ranks
the most important, showing its changes have the largest effect on 𝓁. This is followed
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 39
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 14 Importance plot showing μ⋆. Error bars are displayed at the 95% conﬁdence level
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 15 Global sensitivity analysis with Morris plots. Diagonal lines represent the ranges for σ/μ⋆.O n e
classiﬁcation strategy proposed by Sanchez et al. ( 2014) says factors which are almost linear should be
below the 0.1 line, factors which are monotonic between 0.1 and 0.5 lines, or almost monotonic between
the 0.5 and 1 line, and factors with non-monotonic nonlinearities or interactions with other factors above
the 1 line
in importance by β, and then α each year. However, we see that conﬁdence bars do
overlap in Fig. 14.
Viewing the Morris plots in Fig.15, we can see all parameters are deemed important,
where unimportant parameters would show up in the bottom leftmost portion of the
plot. Using the classiﬁcation strategy of Sanchez et al. ( 2014), all parameters are all
considered to be non-monotonic and/or with high levels of interaction, since σ
μ⋆ > 1
in all cases.
This analysis agrees with the preliminary parameter analysis in Sect. 5.2.
While the Morris method gives us the overall sensitivity across the parameter ranges
(in a global way) and allows us to rank the factors in terms of importance, we also
provide a ﬁne-grained sensitivity analysis around the default values, i.e. a local sensi-
tivity analysis (LSA). For this, we use p = 100 levels, but vary only one parameter at
a time while keeping the others ﬁxed at their default values. This is shown in Fig. 16.
This analysis shows how robust the resulting default values are to small perturba-
tions, but as this is a local method, the results should be interpreted with caution (and
only in conjunction with the GSA method above), since this does not account for any
parameter interactions as warned in Saltelli et al. ( 2019).
Viewing h (the left column), we can see all values surrounding the default have a
similar loss, showing the model is robust to small changes in the aptitude. Looking
across the entire search space, we can see choosing from within an appropriate range for
the aptitude is important though, but the surrounding parameters are always relatively
smooth to the resulting loss. Viewing β (the middle column), we can see the sharp
123

40 B. P. Evans et al.
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 16 Univariate LSA of default parameters, varying one factor at a time with others at their optimised
values. The plots give the change in parameter value ( x-axis) versus 𝓁(y-axis). The dotted vertical black
line shows the optimised value
transition above zero. There is a clear optimal range for β, where the default lies.
However, again, the area surrounding the default values is smooth showing robustness
to the default parameters (assuming we do not vary past the sharp transition). Looking
at α (the ﬁnal column), the plots initially seem somewhat jagged, although when
looking at the scale of the y-axis it becomes clear these are very small shifts in
loss (as veriﬁed by the plotted time series with varying α levels). α was deemed
the least important of the three parameters by the Morris method screening, but was
still important based on the positioning on the Morris plot. We can verify this here,
where changes in α do not have a huge impact on 𝓁.
GSA was performed using SALib from Herman and Usher ( 2017).
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 41
GREATER SYDNEY
(a) No Spatial
Component
CANTERBURY-BANKSTOWN
FAIRFIELD
GEORGES RIVER
CAMDEN
LAKE MACQUARIE
NORTHERN BEACHES
HORNSBY
THE HILLS SHIRE
PENRITH
LIVERPOOL
CAMPBELLTOWN
CENTRAL COAST
WOLLONDILLY
UPPER LACHLAN SHIRE
CANADA BAY
BAYSIDE
SUTHERLAND SHIRE
BLACKTOWN
HAWKESBURY
WILLOUGHBY
LANE COVE
STRATHFIELD
WAVERLEY
RYDE
NORTH SYDNEY
LITHGOW
BURWOOD
BLUE MOUNTAINS
MOSMAN
CITY OF SYDNEY
WOOLLAHRA
KU-RING-GAI
HUNTERS HILL
RANDWICK
INNER WEST
WINGECARRIBEE
CUMBERLAND
CITY OF PARRAMATTA
(b) LGAs
WINGECARRIBEE
RANDWICK
CANADA BAY
CAMPBELLTOWN
LANE COVE
CUMBERLAND
BLUE MOUNTAINS
BAYSIDE
UPPER LACHLAN SHIRE
KU-RING-GAIGEORGES RIVERHUNTERS HILLSUTHERLAND SHIRE
WILLOUGHBY
FAIRFIELD
LIVERPOOL
NORTH SYDNEY
CITY OF PARRAMATTA
BURWOOD
HORNSBY
CANTERBURY-BANKSTOWN
THE HILLS SHIRE
WOOLLAHRA
LITHGOW
PENRITH
MOSMAN
WAVERLEY
STRATHFIELDBLACKTOWNLAKE MACQUARIEINNER WEST
CENTRAL COAST
CAMDEN
NORTHERN BEACHES
HAWKESBURY
WOLLONDILLY
CITY OF SYDNEY
RYDE
(c) Complete
Fig. 17 V arious potential network architectures. The left represents a single node (i.e. no spatial component).
The middle is the proposed graph-based approach constructed from the topological layout of the region.
The right is a complete graph, with individual areas, but no concept of spatial neighbours (due to the fully
connected nature)
G: Network topology
In Sect. 4, we introduced a novel graph-based structure for representing the region,
at the same time introducing spatial submarkets into the simulation (based on nodes
in the graph). In Sect. 5.1 and “Appendix F”, we have validated the usefulness of the
newly introduced parameters and performed a sensitivity analysis of the parameters,
whereas in this section, we look to validate the usefulness of the network structure
itself.
To do this, we compare the newly proposed model (with all parameters included),
against an identical model with only a single node. We also compare to a fully con-
nected network, i.e. where the spatial element (in terms of neighbourhoods) is not
considered directly, but speciﬁc areas still exist. These structures are visualised in
Fig. 17.
G.1 Topologies
G.1.1 No spatial component
To remove submarkets and all spatial components, we use a graph composed of a single
node representing the overall Greater Sydney region. That is, agent characteristics and
dwelling prices are assigned based on the overall Greater Sydney distributions, rather
than speciﬁc area distributions. To implement this, rather than G being deﬁned as
in Sect. 4.1.1, instead, G contains a single node (i.e. a singleton graph) where the
node represents the overall Greater Sydney region, i.e. it is the graph K1. With this
single-node conﬁguration, the spatial outreach from Eq. ( 4.3) is removed, as there is
no concept of space. Likewise, β is no longer deﬁned, as this is expressed in spatial
123

42 B. P. Evans et al.
Fig. 18 V arious network architectures (visualised as the mean± standard deviation range), the actual trend
is given in orange. We see the individual submarket methods perform well, whereas in this case the single
area (meaning no submarkets) method fails to adequately capture the overall trends
terms. However,α remains, which controls the boundedness of the agent as discussed
in “Appendix L”, and h keeps the same interpretation.
G.1.2 Fully connected graph
To represent the fully connected areas, we use a complete graph where every LGA
is connected to every other LGA, i.e. G = K38. Again, outreach [from Eq. ( 4.3)]
need not be considered, since now every area is directly connected to one another.
With this representation, the introduced parameters still remain (i.e α, β,h). Note that
α again directly corresponds to the boundedness (discussed in “Appendix L”) and
does not encompass outreach. β and h have no change to their original meanings
introduced in Sect. 4. This introduces individual submarkets (based on LGAs) into
the simulation, but does not enforce any spatial-based search costs within the market.
As in the proposed approach, agent calibration is also based on the area in which they
reside, so agent characteristics match that of their area.
G.1.3 Analysis
The resulting comparisons are visualised in Fig. 18 which shows the models which
include individual areas signiﬁcantly outperforming the overall Greater Sydney model,
indicating the usefulness of area-speciﬁc submarkets. Between the two area models,
there was little difference in aggregate performance (as shown in Fig.18) which shows
the performance improvements come mainly from the introduction of submarkets,
not necessarily on the overall spatial structure. This shows that β, which is based
on the individual areas, initialising agent characteristics based on location, and the
modiﬁcation of price setting in terms of Qh based on the area are key for resulting
prices (more so than the spatial outreach costs).
However, when considering the resulting agent preferences (in terms of suburbs to
purchase in), the fully connected map had signiﬁcantly more people moving to more
remote regions, whereas the LGA connected spatial topology prevented as drastic
movements (with the spatial outreach term), capturing the fact people are often tied
to speciﬁc areas (i.e. those who work in the CBD and currently reside near there, are
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 43
(a) Spatial Structure Enforced (b) Fully Connected Structure
Fig. 19 V ariations in agent preferences with the proposed spatial structure (left) and without a spatial struc-
ture enforced (right) from ﬁrst-time home buyers situated in the Canterbury–Bankstown region (visualised
in pink and labelled). The colour indicates the percentage of purchases in those areas, with dark indicating
a high percentage of relative purchases (controlled for population sizes). Without a preserved spatial struc-
ture we see much higher rate of purchases on the outskirts of the Greater Sydney region, such as in Upper
Lachlan Shire and Lithgow (labelled). We verify the proposed movements are logical in Sect. 6.3 (colour
ﬁgure online)
unlikely to the outskirts of the Greater Sydney region). This is visualised in Fig. 19,
where we show the proposed movements follow a diffusive-like pattern (Slavko et al.
220b) compared to the fully connected topology which had movements to more remote
regions of Greater Sydney. We further discuss the resulting movements Sect. 6.3,
where we show with the agent movement patterns with the proposed spatial structure
are logical and consistent with the actual reported movements in the Greater Sydney
region based on the observed trends reported in the recent literature.
In this section, we have shown the area-speciﬁc submarket extensions signiﬁcantly
outperform an equivalent model which does not include individual areas, highlighting
the importance of capturing submarkets. Furthermore, the incorporation of area-
speciﬁc submarkets allows for additional insights (such as those in Sect. 6.3.1 which
would not otherwise be possible). We then further validated the choice of the network
topology by comparing resulting agent preferences, and showing the proposed archi-
tecture (with spatial-based search costs) prevents drastic movements by the agent (in
terms of relative distance from an agent’s current location), allowing the agents to act
based on their location (preferring closer areas) in a manner consistent with the actual
observed trends as discussed in Sect. 6.3.
H: Experiment settings
Due to the stochastic and non-deterministic nature of ABMs, we run 100 Monte Carlo
simulations per run (unless otherwise stated) and report the aggregate results over all
runs to get a robust estimate.
123

44 B. P. Evans et al.
Fig. 20 Robustness of scale over the training phases (visualised as the mean ± standard deviation range
for varying scales). We see with varying scales similar results are recovered (with large areas of overlap),
indicating in-variance to the scales used (within acceptable bounds)
H.1 Scale
Experiments are run at a 1:100 scale of the true housing market, i.e. every one hundred
households in the Greater Sydney region are represented by one household in the
model. The 1:100 scale was chosen for efﬁciency, but results for 1:50, 1:100, and
1:200 are also presented in Fig. 20 to show robustness to scale. There is an upper limit
on the scale where the performance will begin to degrade, for example, the number
of overseas investments is given in Table 5, and by using a scale close to 1:1000, we
would lose the contribution of foreign investments (since the values would be < 1).
For lower scales (i.e. 1:1), the results may be more accurate but this comes at the
expense of increased computational power, so the 1:100 provided a good trade-off
between accuracy and efﬁciency.
I: Initialisation data
I.1 Data
All real estate listings and sales from 2006 to present (2020) were used from SIRCA–
CoreLogic, including the sale price, LGA, and sale date. These data are used as the
actual price, and to calibrate the ABM.
I.2 Spatial initialisation
I.2.1 Pricing distributions
Between LGAs, there is a wide range of dwelling sale prices, and different distributions
of prices amongst the LGAs as well. To sample from this effectively, we use kernel
density estimation (KDE) to create a probability density function for each LGA for
each time period. The previous 3 months of sales from the beginning of the time period
are used to generate the density function. Scott’s Rule (Scott 2015) is used to assign
the bandwidth, which sets the bandwidth to n
−1
d+4 , where n is the number of data points
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 45
(a) 2006 (b) 2011 (c) 2015
Fig. 21 KDE plots for each LGA based on SIRCA–CoreLogic data. Dark red indicates the Greater Sydney
average, and this is assigned to LGAs without enough data to generate their own reliable KDE
(in this case dwelling sales in the LGA at the beginning of the time period), and d is
the number of dimensions (in this case d = 1). When new houses are created for an
area, they are set with an initial quality based on this distribution. The resulting KDEs
are shown in Fig. 21.
I.2.2 Positioning
Households are not assigned to an LGA directly, as households can freely move areas.
Instead, the households area is based on the residential dwelling of the household (and
thus can change over time). When we reference a households area, we are referring to
the LGA of the dwelling where the household currently resides.
At the beginning of the simulation, households which are homeowners are assigned
to dwellings to match the population distribution amongst LGAs. The income and
liquid wealth for the household are then assigned based on the brackets from the
dwellings LGA. Renters are assigned a random LGA to begin with (again weighted
by the population of each LGA) and income and wealth based on the distribution of
that LGA. Households then try and ﬁnd a rental they can afford (on with a rental price
approximately 10–30% of the household’s income) which may mean some have to
move LGAs.
I.3 Time periods
In line with the previous work of Glavatskiy et al. (2020), and following the Australian
census timelines (which are performed every 5 years), we choose the three most recent
census periods for analysis. These are 2006–2010, 2011–2015, and 2016–2019. The
length was chosen such that upon new census information becoming available, a new
simulation is run. Meaning, a separate model (and optimisation process) is run for each
of the time periods to ensure the model is calibrated to the most recent data available.
In doing so, we ensure the agent characteristics of the model most closely match those
in the true Greater Sydney market. As each period corresponds to the census years,
there is a large array of available data for calibration to ensure the models begin in a
state as close to possible as the true populations state. Alternate (non-census) dates
123

46 B. P. Evans et al.
could be used; however, the model may not begin with as accurate of a reﬂection on the
true underlying agent characteristics (depending on the data availability). While the
models are calibrated for the time periods outlined here, such calibrations would also
work well for surrounding dates (or alternate run duration’s), or the model could be
re-calibrated for alternative dates to provide additional forecasting—for example, after
the 2021 census, the agent characteristics could be reassigned and a new optimisation
process run to reﬂect updated agent behaviours, likewise for past market behaviour
such as with the 2001 census.
I.4 Household characteristics
I.4.1 Area
Agents are initialised into an area based on the Australian census data, meaning the
population of each area at the beginning of the simulations corresponds to the propor-
tions from the census data for that time period. For example, if there are three areas “A ”,
“B”, “C”, and the true proportions in each are 60:25:15, the model will also populate
agents into the three areas according to this proportion. Throughout the simulation,
agents may move areas. They may be forced to move to a cheaper area if they cannot
afford their current area, or they may move to a more afﬂuent area if they can afford a
dwelling there. So once the simulation begins, the movement dynamics are controlled
by the agents’ cash ﬂow position (again from census data, outlined below). Initialising
agents into areas based on census data allows for correct agent characteristics (such as
income and net worth) that directly line up with those observed throughout the Greater
Sydney region.
I.4.2 Income
Income is assigned from the distribution based on the households area. This distribution
comes from the census data. Income grows throughout the simulation. The income
brackets follow those speciﬁed in the census data.
I.4.3 Liquid wealth
Again, the liquid wealth (liquidity) of a household is based on the true distributions
from census data. However, in this case, liquidity is not available per LGA, only for
Greater Sydney as a whole. So to map a household to an appropriate liquidity bracket,
the households liquid is based on the income of the household. That is, if a household
is in the top X% of earners in an LGA, the liquidity will be in the top X% as well
(approximately, since liquidity is from brackets).
I.5 Population distribution
In this case, there are three measures of interest. The total number of dwellings, the
total number of households, and the distribution of these households amongst LGAs.
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 47
The dwellings and households estimates from the census data are used for each year,
and simple linear projections used for forecasting the growth of these. The distribution
amongst LGAs is that recorded at the start of the simulation and is assumed to grow
linearly with the overall population size. Individual LGA future population projections
are available from 2016 onward, but as no projections existed before this date, we used
this simpliﬁed measure instead of all LGAs growing by a ﬁxed percentage within a
given simulation period. As such, higher movements towards one particular LGA
throughout simulation could indicate the requirement of additional dwellings being
built here to cater for the growth, which is another contribution we consider in later
sections of this work.
J: Movement pattern visualisations
Over 10 million total movements were tracked across the simulations (approximately
3.3 million per time period). All plots in this section represent the normalised heatmaps
of these movements. The total number of movements to a particular LGA is scaled by
the population size of this LGA, meaning the results can be interpreted as a preference
for certain areas rather than visualising the population size of the LGAs. Therefore,
movements are not just reﬂecting larger populations, instead, reﬂecting a larger portion
of people moving there relative to the size. All movements are then normalised such
that the summation of all cells in the plot is 1, meaning if a particular cell has a value
of 0.05, this means 5% of all matched movements moved to this LGA.
The rows and columns of the plots are always sorted in ascending order based on
median price, i.e. the most affordable LGAs ﬁrst, and the most expensive LGA as the
ﬁnal row or column.
K: Exogenous variables
There are two main external inﬂuences on the model, which are governed by govern-
ment approvals (in the case of overseas investments) and the central bank (in the case
of mortgage rates).
K.1 Overseas investors
Overseas investments are often cited as a key driver of price growth in the Australian
market (Rogers et al. 2017), and ﬁgures show the foreign investment has more than
tripled since the mid-1990s (Haylen 2014). However, actual data on foreign invest-
ments are difﬁcult to ﬁnd. ABS has described their own data on overseas investments
to parliament as “hit or miss” Iggulden ( 2014).
The purpose of this work is not a full investigation into overseas investments
[overviews are given in Gauder et al. ( 2014), House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Economics ( 2014)], but rather the contribution overseas might have in
relation to many other factors with the readily available data (be this complete or not).
123

48 B. P. Evans et al.
Fig. 22 Migrations. These plots
capture new households in
Greater Sydney throughout the
simulation period, due to either
migration or splitting of existing
households. The ﬁrst row is the
2006–2010 period, the middle
row the 2011–2015 period, and
the ﬁnal row the 2016–2019
period
(a) New Renters (b) New Owners
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 49
Fig. 23 Investors. These plots
show the simulation difference
between local and overseas
investment patterns. The ﬁrst
row is the 2006–2010 period, the
middle row the 2011–2015
period, and the ﬁnal row the
2016–2019 period
(a) Local (b)Overseas
123

50 B. P. Evans et al.
(a) Renting LGA (rows), to Purchase LGA (columns) (b) Purchase LGAs
Fig. 24 First-time home buyers. The ﬁrst row is the 2006–2010 period, the middle row the 2011–2015
period, and the ﬁnal row the 2016–2019 period
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 51
Fig. 25 Average overseas approval amount
Table 5 Overseas investment approval
Period Number approved V alue approved Average per approval
2018–2019 1337 $3,100,000,000 $2,318,624
2017–2019 2340 $4,400,000,000 $1,880,342
2016–2017 4224 $6,580,000,000 $1,557,765
2014–2015 12349 $20,230,000,000 $1,638,189
2013–2014 7814 $13,220,000,000 $1,691,835
2012–2013 3580 $5,580,000,000 $1,558,659
2011–2012 3048 $6,920,000,000 $2,270,341
2010–2011 2598 $5,070,000,000 $1,951,501
2009–2010 910 $1,950,000,000 $2,142,857
2008–2009 956 $2,210,000,000 $2,311,715
2007–2008 1223 $4,230,000,000 $3,458,708
2006–2007 908 $2,890,000,000 $3,182,819
For this, we use the annual reports from the Foreign Investment Review Board
(FIRB) from June 2006 to June 2019. The June 2019–June 2020 report was not avail-
able at the time of this writing (in 2020), as reports are not made available until the
following year. Data are provided yearly at a NSW level, which is converted to monthly
(simply dividing by 12). Again, data in this area are sparse, so this is the closest esti-
mate we could derive. These data are provided in Table 5, and the average approval
per year given in Fig. 25.
While the data are provided for the entirety of NSW, it has been shown that foreign
investors prefer the inner city over rural areas, and thus, the NSW levels have been
used for Greater Sydney. This is a fair assumption since the numbers are relatively
123

52 B. P. Evans et al.
Fig. 26 α’s effect on utility
maximising behaviour
conservative anyway. For the testing period, the most recent overseas approval value
from the training period is used.
K.2 Mortgage rates
Mortgage rates are those set by the RBA. The ﬁnal training months mortgage rate is
used throughout the testing period since no real value can be read.
L: Utility function
Following Axtell et al. (2014), agents are assumed to choose the most expensive house
they can afford, that is, the house price directly corresponds to the utility for the agent.
However, the introduction of α alters this, such that there is some uncertainty or
error in the agents choice. When α = 1, the perfect utility maximisation behaviour
is recovered where the agent attempts to purchase the most expensive dwelling they
can afford. For α< 1, the agent buys the most expensive dwelling they can afford
with probability α, which then decreases for each subsequent listing in turn. This
is visualised in Fig. 26. For high α, we can see the probability mass is contained
only in the highest priced dwellings. For lower α, this probability mass becomes
more distributed, meaning less focus on utility, and potential for cheaper houses to be
purchased. For α = 0, the utility is not considered at all and a random house within
the agents budget is chosen (i.e. the probability mass is uniform across options). α,
therefore, corresponds to the boundedness of the agent.
The above description considers the case of uniform knowledge, i.e. for investors
where they are assumed to be invariant to the areas available. However, for ﬁrst-time
home buyers, we propose a space-based knowledge where buyers are more likely to
consider listings close to where they are renting. The probability associated with the
distance to the agents’ location is visualised in Fig. 27. The uniform knowledge of
investors is given in green, and the spatial knowledge of ﬁrst-time home buyers is
given as the dotted black line.
For ﬁrst-time home buyers, the probability of viewing a listing is therefore con-
trolled by both the proximity of the listing to the agents current (rental) location, and
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 53
Fig. 27 Probability of viewing
based on distance to agents
location
Fig. 28 First-time home buyers probability of viewing a listing for various α’s. Showing the relationship
between dwelling price (x-axis) and distance to dwelling ( y-axis), and how α adjusts this distribution. Low
α’s correspond to higher dispersion, and less focus on utility maximising behaviour. High α’s focus the
agent on dwellings which maximise utility
the price of the listing. This is visualised in Fig. 28.F o rα = 0, the agent preference
is uniform across all choices, placing no emphasis on utility (from either price or dif-
ference). As α increases, the focus shifts to the more expensive dwellings, and does
so based on the distance to the listing. This is shown in Fig. 28, where with increasing
α the emphasis focuses on the top right corner, which is the optimal value for both
distance (closest) and price (most expensive in the agents budget). We can see that
price remains the most important term in the agents’ utility though, with close listings
with low prices having a low resulting probability, indicating the agent likely wants
to move to a more afﬂuent area if they can afford to do so. However, given an equal
price, agents will prefer the closer listing.
References
Alhashimi H, Dwyer W (2004) Is there such an entity as a housing market. In: 10th annual paciﬁc rim real
estate conference (press), Bangkok
Arcaute E, Molinero C, Hatna E, Murcio R, V argas-Ruiz C, Masucci AP , Batty M (2016) Cities and regions
in Britain through hierarchical percolation. R Soc Open Sci 3(4):150691
Axtell R, Farmer D, Geanakoplos J, Howitt P , Carrella E, Conlee B, Goldstein J, Hendrey M, Kalikman P ,
Masad D, et al. (2014) An agent-based model of the housing market bubble in metropolitan Washington,
DC. In: Whitepaper for Deutsche Bundesbank’s Spring conference on “Housing markets and the
macroeconomy: challenges for monetary policy and ﬁnancial stability”
123

54 B. P. Evans et al.
Bahadir B, Mykhaylova O (2014) Housing market dynamics with delays in the construction sector. J Hous
Econ 26:94–108
Bangura M, Lee CL (2019) The differential geography of housing affordability in Sydney: a disaggregated
approach. Aust Geogr 50(3):295–313
Bangura M, Lee CL (2020) Housing price bubbles in Greater Sydney: evidence from a submarket analysis.
Hous Stud 1–36. https://doi.org/10.1080/02673037.2020.1803802
Baptista R, Farmer JD, Hinterschweiger M, Low K, Tang D, Uluc A (2016) Macroprudential policy in an
agent-based model of the UK housing market. Bank of England working papers 619, Bank of England.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2850414
Barbosa H, Barthelemy M, Ghoshal G, James CR, Lenormand M, Louail T, Menezes R, Ramasco JJ, Simini
F, Tomasini M (2018) Human mobility: models and applications. Phys Rep 734:1–74
Barthelemy M (2016) The structure and dynamics of cities. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Barthelemy M (2019) The statistical physics of cities. Nat Rev Phys 1(6)
Barthelemy M, Bordin P , Berestycki H, Gribaudi M (2013) Self-organization versus top-down planning in
the evolution of a city. Sci Rep 3:2153
Bergstra J, Y amins D, Cox D (2013) Making a science of model search: hyperparameter optimization in
hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures. In: International conference on machine learning, pp
115–123
Berndt DJ, Clifford J (1994) Using dynamic time warping to ﬁnd patterns in time series. In: Proceedings of
the 3rd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. AAAI Press, AAAIWS’94,
pp 359–370
Bessant JC, Johnson G (2013) Dream on declining homeownership among young people in Australia? Hous
Theory Soc 30(2):177–192
Burnside C, Eichenbaum M, Rebelo S (2016) Understanding booms and busts in housing markets. J Polit
Econ 124(4):1088–1147
Campolongo F, Cariboni J, Saltelli A (2007) An effective screening design for sensitivity analysis of large
models. Environ Model Softw 22(10):1509–1518
Carstensen CL (2015) An agent-based model of the housing market: steps toward a computational tool for
policy analysis. University of Copenhagen, MSc-szakdolgozat
Chang SL, Harding N, Zachreson C, Cliff OM, Prokopenko M (2020) Modelling transmission and control
of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10218
Cheng IH, Raina S, Xiong W (2014) Wall street and the housing bubble. Am Econ Rev 104(9):2797–2829
Cliff OM, Harding N, Piraveenan M, Erten EY , Gambhir M, Prokopenko M (2018) Investigating spa-
tiotemporal dynamics and synchrony of inﬂuenza epidemics in Australia: an agent-based modelling
approach. Simul Model Pract Theory 87:412–431
Conlisk J (1996) Why bounded rationality? J Econ Lit 34(2):669–700
Crosato E, Nigmatullin R, Prokopenko M (2018) On critical dynamics and thermodynamic efﬁciency of
urban transformations. R Soc Open Sci 5(10):180863
Crosato E, Prokopenko M, Harré MS (2021) The polycentric dynamics of Melbourne and Sydney: suburb
attractiveness divides a city at the home ownership level. Proc R Soc A 477(2245):20200514
Edmonds B, ní Aodha L (2018) Using agent-based modelling to inform policy—what could possibly go
wrong? In: International workshop on multi-agent systems and agent-based simulation. Springer, pp
1–16
Fernald M (2020) Americas rental housing 2020. Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University,
Cambridge
Frías-Paredes L, Mallor F, León T, Gastón-Romeo M (2016) Introducing the temporal distortion index to
perform a bidimensional analysis of renewable energy forecast. Energy 94:180–194
Frías-Paredes L, Mallor F, Gastón-Romeo M, León T (2017) Assessing energy forecasting inaccuracy by
simultaneously considering temporal and absolute errors. Energy Convers Manag 142:533–546
Gallegati M, Kirman A (1999) Beyond the representative agent. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham
Gauder M, Houssard C, Orsmond D, et al. (2014) Foreign investment in residential real estate. RBA Bulletin,
June pp 11–18
Ge J (2013) Who creates housing bubbles? An agent-based study. In: International workshop on multi-agent
systems and agent-based simulation. Springer, pp 143–150
Ge J (2017) Endogenous rise and collapse of housing price: an agent-based model of the housing market.
Comput Environ Urban Syst 62:182–198
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 55
Geanakoplos J, Axtell R, Farmer JD, Howitt P , Conlee B, Goldstein J, Hendrey M, Palmer NM, Y ang
CY (2012) Getting at systemic risk via an agent-based model of the housing market. Am Econ Rev
102(3):53–58
Gilbert N, Hawksworth JC, Swinney PA (2009) An agent-based model of the English housing market. In:
AAAI spring symposium: technosocial predictive analytics, pp 30–35
Glavatskiy KS, Prokopenko M, Carro A, Ormerod P , Harre M (2020) Explaining herding and volatility in
the cyclical price dynamics of urban housing markets using a large scale agent-based model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.07571
Goldstein J (2017) Rethinking housing with agent-based models: Models of the housing bubble and crash
in the Washington DC area 1997–2009. PhD thesis, George Mason University
Greater Sydney Commission (2018) Greater Sydney region plan: a metropolis of three cities. NSW Depart-
ment of Planning and Environment. https://www.greater.sydney/metropolis-of-three-cities . Accessed
22 Aug 2020
Guest R, Rohde N (2017) The contribution of foreign real estate investment to housing price growth in
Australian capital cities. Abacus 53(3):304–318
Haylen A (2014) House prices, ownership and affordability: trends in New South Wales. NSW Parliamentary
Library
Herman J, Usher W (2017) SALib: an open-source Python library for sensitivity analysis. J Open Source
Softw. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00097
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics (2014) Report on Foreign Investment in
Residential Real Estate. The Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia
Huang Y , Ge J (2009) House prices and the collapse of stock market in mainland China?-an empirical study
on house price index. In: Paciﬁc Rim real estate conference
Iggulden T (2014) ABS admits data on foreign real estate buyers is ‘hit and miss’. https://www.abc.net.au/
news/2014-06-25/abs-admits-foreign-real-estate-purchase-data-unreliable/5549926 Accessed 10
May 2020
Kim JH, Pagliara F, Preston J (2005) The intention to move and residential location choice behaviour. Urban
Stud 42(9):1621–1636
Kouwenberg R, Zwinkels R (2014) Forecasting the US housing market. Int J Forecast 30(3):415–425
Kouwenberg R, Zwinkels RC (2015) Endogenous price bubbles in a multi-agent system of the housing
market. PLoS ONE 10(6):e0129070
Kupke V , Rossini P (2011) Housing affordability in Australia for ﬁrst home buyers on moderate incomes.
Property Management
La Cava G, Leal H, Zurawski A et al (2017) Housing accessibility for ﬁrst home buyers. Reserve Bank of
Australia Bulletin, pp 19–28
LeBaron B, Tesfatsion L (2008) Modeling macroeconomies as open-ended dynamic systems of interacting
agents. Am Econ Rev 98(2):246–50
Louf R, Barthelemy M (2013) Modeling the polycentric transition of cities. Phys Rev Lett 111(19):198702
Mc Breen J, Goffette-Nagot F, Jensen P (2010) Information and search on the housing market: an agent-
based model. In: Li Calzi M, Milone L, Pellizzari P (eds) Progress in artiﬁcial economics. Springer,
Berlin, pp 153–164
McMaster R, Watkins C (1999) The economics of housing: the need for a new approach. In:
PRRES/AsRES/IRES conference. Kuala Lumpur
Miles W (2008) Boom-bust cycles and the forecasting performance of linear and non-linear models of house
prices. J Real Estate Finance Econ 36(3):249–264
Morris MD (1991) Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational experiments. Technometrics
33(2):161–174
Myers C, Rabiner L, Rosenberg A (1980) Performance tradeoffs in dynamic time warping algorithms for
isolated word recognition. IEEE Trans Acoust Speech Signal Process 28(6):623–635
Pangallo M, Nadal JP , Vignes A (2019) Residential income segregation: a behavioral model of the housing
market. J Econ Behav Organ 159:15–35
Pawson H, Martin C (2020) Rental property investment in disadvantaged areas: the means and motivations
of Western Sydney’s new landlords. Hous Stud 1–23https://doi.org/10.1080/02673037.2019.1709806
Piazzesi M, Schneider M, Tuzel S (2007) Housing, consumption and asset pricing. J Financ Econ 83(3):531–
569
Piovani D, Arcaute E, Uchoa G, Wilson A, Batty M (2018) Measuring accessibility using gravity and
radiation models. R Soc Open Sci 5(9):171668
123

56 B. P. Evans et al.
Poledna S, Miess MG, Hommes CH (2019) Economic forecasting with an agent-based model. Available at
SSRN 3484768
Polhill G (2018) Why the social simulation community should tackle prediction. Rev Artif Soc Soc Simul.
https://rofasss.org/2018/08/06/gp/ . Accessed 1 May 2020
Power C (2009) A spatial agent-based model of n-person prisoner’s dilemma cooperation in a socio-
geographic community. J Artif Soc Soc Simul 12(1):8
Raimbault J, Broere J, Somveille M, Serna JM, Strombom E, Moore C, Zhu B, Sugar L (2020) A spatial
agent based model for simulating and optimizing networked eco-industrial systems. Resour Conserv
Recycl 155:104538
Randolph B, Pinnegar S, Tice A (2013) The ﬁrst home owner boost in Australia: a case study of outcomes
in the Sydney housing market. Urban Policy Res 31(1):55–73
Rogers D, Lee CL, Y an D (2015) The politics of foreign investment in Australian housing: Chinese investors,
translocal sales agents and local resistance. Hous Stud 30(5):730–748
Rogers D, Wong A, Nelson J (2017) Public perceptions of foreign and Chinese real estate investment:
intercultural relations in Global Sydney. Aust Geogr 48(4):437–455
Sakoe H, Chiba S (1978) Dynamic programming algorithm optimization for spoken word recognition. IEEE
Trans Acoust Speech Signal Process 26(1):43–49
Saltelli A, Tarantola S, Campolongo F, Ratto M (2004) Sensitivity analysis in practice: a guide to assessing
scientiﬁc models, vol 1. Wiley Online Library, New Y ork
Saltelli A, Aleksankina K, Becker W, Fennell P , Ferretti F, Holst N, Li S, Wu Q (2019) Why so many
published sensitivity analyses are false: a systematic review of sensitivity analysis practices. Environ
Model Softw 114:29–39
Sanchez DG, Lacarrière B, Musy M, Bourges B (2014) Application of sensitivity analysis in building energy
simulations: combining ﬁrst-and second-order elementary effects methods. Energy Build 68:741–750
Scott DW (2015) Multivariate density estimation: theory, practice, and visualization. Wiley, New Y ork
Shahriari B, Swersky K, Wang Z, Adams RP , De Freitas N (2015) Taking the human out of the loop: a
review of Bayesian optimization. Proc IEEE 104(1):148–175
Shimizu C, Nishimura KG, Watanabe T (2010) Housing prices in Tokyo: a comparison of hedonic and
repeat sales measures. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik 230(6):792–813
Simini F, González MC, Maritan A, Barabási AL (2012) A universal model for mobility and migration
patterns. Nature 484(7392):96
Simon HA (1955) A behavioral model of rational choice. Q J Econ 69(1):99–118
Simon HA (1957) Models of man; social and rational. Wiley, New Y ork
Sinai TM (2012) House price moments in boom-bust cycles. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research
Slavko B, Glavatskiy K, Prokopenko M (2019) Dynamic resettlement as a mechanism of phase transitions
in urban conﬁgurations. Phys Rev E 99(4):042143
Slavko B, Glavatskiy K, Prokopenko M (2020a) City structure shapes directional resettlement ﬂows in
Australia. Sci Rep 10(1):1–11
Slavko B, Prokopenko M, Glavatskiy KS (2020b) Diffusive resettlement: irreversible urban transitions in
closed systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.04094
Snoek J, Larochelle H, Adams RP (2012) Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems, pp 2951–2959
Tesfatsion L (2002) Agent-based computational economics: growing economies from the bottom up. Artif
Life 8(1):55–82
Thomas M, Hall A (2016) Housing affordability in Australia. Brieﬁng Book: Key Issues for the 45th
Parliament pp 86–90
Ustvedt S (2016) An agent-based model of a metropolitan housing market-linking micro-level behavior to
macro-level analysis. Master’s thesis, NTNU
V allance L, Charbonnier B, Paul N, Dubost S, Blanc P (2017) Towards a standardized procedure to assess
solar forecast accuracy: a new ramp and time alignment metric. Sol Energy 150:408–422
Vincent L, Thome N (2019) Shape and time distortion loss for training deep time series forecasting models.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems, pp 4189–4201
Wang W, Y ang S, Hu F, Han Z, Jaeger C (2018) An agent-based modeling for housing prices with bounded
rationality. In: Journal of physics: conference series, vol 1113. IOP Publishing, p 012014
Watkins CA (2001) The deﬁnition and identiﬁcation of housing submarkets. Environ Plan A 33(12):2235–
2253
123

The impact of social inﬂuence in Australian real estate: a spatial ABM 57
Wei SJ, Zhang X, Liu Y (2012) Status competition and housing prices. Technical report, National Bureau
of Economic Research
Wilkins R, Lass I (2015) The household, income and labour dynamics in Australia survey: Selected ﬁndings
from waves 1 to 12. Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research, University of
Wong PY (2017) Foreign real estate investment and the Australian residential property market: a study on
Chinese investors. Int J Soc Behav Educ Econ Bus Ind Eng 11:1529–1538
Y etsenga R, Emmett F (2020) The ANZ CoreLogic housing affordability report 2020. ANZ Media Centre
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123
