SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING
Toward Strength and Stability
Agent-Based Modeling of Infrastructure Markets
MICHAEL J. NORTH
Argonne National Laboratory
Complex Adaptive Systems (CASs) can be applied to investigate complex infrastructures and infra-
structure interdependencies. Agent-based modeling (ABM) is a new CAS-based approach to the con-
struction of models. The CAS agents within the Spot Market Agent Research Tool (SMART) and Flex-
ible Agent Simulation Toolkit (FAST) ABMs allow investigation of the electric power infrastructure,
the natural gas infrastructure, and their interdependencies. The Swarm-based SMART models use sets
of agents and interconnections to represent electric power and natural gas systems. A prototype virtual
reality (VR) interface has also been constructed for a version of the SMART model. This tool is
intended to explore the use of advanced interactive three-dimensional visualization in agent-based
modeling. The Java-based FAST model is currently under construction. FAST is a complete redesign
of the SMART models that includes improvements in the modeling environment, model detail, and
representational fidelity. Developing ABMs is difficult but can be rewarding.
Keywords: complex adaptive systems, CAS, agent-based modeling, ABM, electric
power system modeling, natural gas system modeling, infrastructure
interdependency, SW ARM, RePast, CA VE, virtual reality, VR
M
any insights can be gained by viewing energy analysis from a complex adaptive sys-
tems (CASs) agent-based modeling perspective. Argonne has taken such a perspec-
tive to produce integrated models of the electric power and natural gas markets. The agents
within the present Spot Market Agent Research Tool (SMART) and the future Flexible
Agent Simulation Toolkit (FAST) allow investigation of the electric power infrastructure,
the natural gas infrastructure, and their interdependency.
BACKGROUND
Agent-based modeling (ABM) represents a new approach to the construction of models.
Like all new techniques, ABM builds on existing approaches. Two key issues are identifying
meaningful insights and managing time.
Identifying Meaningful Insights
One of the key issues in most types of modeling is identifying meaningful insights. This is
particularly true for agent-based modeling. Furthermore, this is one of the areas that most
clearly differentiate CAS modeling from some more traditional approaches.
307
AUTHOR’S NOTE: This work is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy under contract number
W-31-109-ENG-38.
Social Science Computer Review, V ol. 19 No. 3, Fall 2001 307-323
© 2001 Sage Publications

Modeling approaches such as linear programming identify final states of computations as
representing the real world, whereas such things as individual simplex iterations are consid-
ered artifacts. With these approaches, the numeric path taken by a computation is not consid-
ered meaningful. Only the final optimized or stable state has meaning.
An important question to ask when looking at any model is, “Which states represent the
real world and which are computational artifacts?” With CAS modeling, the answer is that
individual computational steps are considered meaningful up to some resolution limit.
Defining the resolution limit is a critical CAS model design issue. For example, the
SMART electrical and natural gas CAS models include a market for each commodity. These
markets require competitive bidding. The market outputs represent decision making in the
real world. However, the internal bidding process implementations do not necessarily reflect
the real world step-by-step.
Real-world bidding processes that use telephones to place bids and wall clocks to time
calls are replaced by polling processes. Thus, the individual market steps represent the real
world, but the steps by which bids are collected may not. Accurately defining this resolution
allows model output to be properly understood and applied. It also shows the flexibility of the
CAS approach because resolution is only limited by the willingness of the designers to
include more detail.
The extended electrical and natural gas CAS models that are currently under construction
not only will include real-world markets but will also include an accurate representation of
the bidding process.
Managing Time
Time management is a critical issue for most types of modeling, including ABM. Over the
years, many different approaches have been taken from the simplest time step methods to the
most advanced distributed discrete event systems. Sophisticated modeling systems typically
focus on discrete event simulation.
Discrete event simulation is an effective implementation strategy for ABM. Models
implemented using this approach go beyond the discrete event methodology by giving each
agent or element in the system far greater power to adapt to its environment and by attempt-
ing to solve problems through emergent behavior rather than simple analysis.
Most agents representing real-world entities will likely have a set of core functions that
are activated on a periodic basis during each model run. The activations typically occur at
hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly intervals during runs. Creating a simple and uni-
form set of functions or methods for each time step will allow diverse groups of agents to all
use the same simulation engine.
Taking an object-oriented programming (OOP) approach to CAS is consistent with the
approach taken by most CAS model developers. OOP texts refer to the ability to call methods
appropriate to each object using the same uniform name as “polymorphism” (Booch, 1994).
In Java, this is implemented as either a common base class or as a formal interface. In Swarm,
this is implemented using either a common method name or a formal protocol.
In addition to the core periodic methods, several conditionally activated methods may be
used. These “triggers” are used either for efficiency or for convenience. They can make a sys-
tem more efficient by only being checked and activated when the associated conditions
occur. They can also simplify programming by providing a simple scheduling mechanism.
Swarm uses an advanced scheduler to set up such triggers.
308 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE
Several tools presently exist:
• SMART Version 2.0 (SMART II) is a Swarm model with an integrated set of agents and inter-
connections representing the electric power marketing and transmission infrastructure.
• SMART II VR is a virtual reality (VR) interface for SMART II.
• SMART II+ is an extension to SMART II that includes an integrated set of agents and intercon-
nections representing the electric power infrastructure, the natural gas infrastructure, and con-
nections between them in the form of natural gas–fired electric generators.
FAST is currently under construction. FAST is a complete redesign of SMART II+ that
includes improvements in the modeling environment, model detail, and representational
fidelity.
SMART II
SMART II is a Swarm-based (Burkhart, Askenazi, & Minar, 2000; Panepento, 2000)
model that uses a set of agents and interconnections to represent electric power systems.
SMART II is the Swarm Development Group 2000 Conference (SwarmFest 2000) Best Pre-
sentation winner. SMART II itself builds on several other models (VanKuiken et al., 1994;
Veselka et al., 1994). SMART II includes three different kinds of components: (a) generation
agents that produce electric power, (b) consumer agents that use electric power, and (c) inter-
connections that represent the transmission grid.
SMART II considers important economic issues such as production costs, investment
capital, demand growth for successful consumers, new generation capacity for profitable
producers, and bankruptcy for noncompetitive organizations.
SMART II uses two different kinds of agents to model the electric spot market. Spe-
cifically, agents are either electric power generators or consumers.
Generation agents choose whether to sell power based on cost curves similar to that
shown in Figure 1. Generators determine their production level based on the potential profit
to be made. Each generator has investment capital that is increased by profits and reduced by
losses. If a generator reaches a predetermined level of investment capital, it can purchase
additional production capacity in the form of new generators.
New generators are similar to their owner and can connect to the distribution network in
either the same location or a new one. Generators that run out of investment capital go bank-
rupt and no longer participate in the market.
The generator agent rules are the following:
• If the agent made a profit in the last hour, then attempt to increase sales.
• If the agent posted a loss in the last hour, then attempt to decrease sales.
• If the total profit has risen above the investment level for a new unit, then purchase a new
generator.
• If the total profit has fallen to zero, then go bankrupt.
Consumer agents choose whether to sell power based on cost curves similar to that shown
in Figure 1. Consumers buy electric power for their own use. Consumers buy on the basis of
the potential to use the purchased power to make a profit. This can include industrial users
who produce goods based on electric power and populations of individuals who vary their
demand based on power prices. If a consumer reaches a predetermined level of investment
capital, it can grow in the form of new consumers.
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 309

New consumers are similar to their originator and can connect to the distribution system
in either the same location or a new one. This can represent the growth of electric
power-based businesses or an influx of people due to favorable economic conditions, partic-
ularly employment opportunities. Consumers who run out of investment capital go bankrupt
and no longer participate in the market. Bankruptcy represents the decline of electric
power-based businesses or the departure of people due to unfavorable economic conditions.
The consumer agent rules are the following:
• If the agent made a profit in the last hour, then attempt to increase purchases.
• If the agent posted a loss in the last hour, then attempt to decrease purchases.
• If the total profit has risen above the investment level expansion, then grow by creating new
consumers.
• If the total profit has fallen to zero, then go bankrupt.
SMART II has undergone initial qualitative validation by matching its outputs to several
basic analytic predictions. Markets with a single superior producer among a large number of
higher cost competitors have been tested. Also, markets with many identical participants
have been tested.
Much more work is clearly required to quantitatively validate and calibrate SMART II;
therefore, only limited qualitative insights are currently being derived.
The SMART II interface is shown in Figure 2, and the price graph is shown in Figure 3.
As originally presented at SwarmFest 2000, qualitative insights from SMART II indicate
that certain transmission line configurations may encourage price spikes. Soon after
SwarmFest 2000, this insight was borne out.
As was specifically noted at SwarmFest 2000, the California electrical grid has a configu-
ration of a type that may cause price spikes. Substantial price spikes of the kind predicted by
SMART II were recently observed in this market.
Further qualitative insights suggest that greater electrical market price stability may be
gained by consciously avoiding specific configurations that encourage instabilities. In other
words, qualitative insights from SMART II can help us make things better by not making
things worse.
310 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW
0
50
100
150
200
0 500 1000 1500 2000
MWh
$/MWh
Cost
Value
Figure 1: Example SMART I Agent Cost and Value Curves
NOTE: SMART = Spot Market Agent Research Tool.

SMART II VR
SMART II VR is a prototype agent visualization tool. SMART II VR is intended to
explore the use of advanced interactive three-dimensional visualization in agent-based
modeling.
SMART II VR is a CA VE Automatic Virtual Environment (CA VE)–based virtual reality
interface for SMART II. The CA VE is a VR library codeveloped by the University of Illinois
at Chicago and Argonne (Pape, Cruz-Neira, & Czernuszenko, 2000). From theCAVE User’s
Guide:
The CA VE is a projection-based VR system that surrounds the viewer with four screens. The
screens are arranged in a cube made up of three rear-projection screens for walls and a
down-projection screen for the floor; that is, a projector overhead points to a mirror, which
reflects the images onto the floor. A viewer wears stereo shutter glasses and a
six-degrees-of-freedom head-tracking device. As the viewer moves inside the CA VE, the cor-
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 311
Figure 2: The SMART II Interface
NOTE: SMART = Spot Market Agent Research Tool.

rect stereoscopic perspective projections are calculated for each wall. A second sensor and but-
tons in a wand held by the viewer provide interaction with the virtual environment. (Pape et al.,
2000)
SMART II VR includes an interactive multifunction wand and two rendering modes. The
interactive multifunction wand is sensitive to wand position and wand orientation and
includes buttons and a joystick. The wand buttons control interactions. The wand angle
selects the joystick feature:
• Above 45°, the wand controls elevation and rotation:
• Moving the joystick forward and back controls elevation. Forward moves the viewer up.
Backward moves the viewer down.
• Moving the joystick left and right controls rotation.
• Between 45° and –45°, the wand controls planar translation:
• Moving the joystick forward and back changes the X-axis location.
• Moving the joystick left and right changes the Z-axis location.
• Below –45°, the wand controls the model run and the rendering mode:
• Moving the joystick forward and back controls the model run. Forward starts the model run.
Backward stops the model run.
• Moving the joystick left and right controls the rendering mode. Left selects detail-rendering
mode. Right selects speed-rendering mode.
The wand buttons allow object resizing. Pressing a button while the wand is in contact
with an object activates resizing. Holding the button and dragging the object selects a new
size. The wand display color gives grip feedback. A red glow surrounding the wand when the
wand buttons are pressed means that the wand is not currently interacting with a target. A
green glow surrounding the wand when the wand buttons are pressed means that the wand is
interacting with a target.
Detail-rendering mode focuses on rendering quality. Directional lighting is included.
Agents are rendered as lighted spheres. A texture-mapped floor with shadows and first-order
312 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW
Figure 3: The SMART II Price Graph
NOTE: SMART = Spot Market Agent Research Tool.

reflections is included. This mode allows SMART II VR to take advantage of computers with
high-graphics performance. An example is shown in Figure 4.
Speed-rendering mode focuses on rendering time. Agents are rendered as flat shaded
cubes. This mode allows SMART II VR to be used on low-performance personal computers.
Figure 5 shows an example.
In SMART II VR, generation agents are shown as green spheres or cubes. Spheres are
shown in detailed-rendering mode, and cubes are shown in speed-rendering mode. The size
of each object represents its total normalized investment capital level. Size can be interac-
tively changed with the CA VE wand. Each object’s color intensity represents its hourly profit
level.
In SMART II VR, consumer agents are shown as blue spheres or cubes. Spheres are
shown in detailed-rendering mode, and cubes are shown in speed-rendering mode. The size
of each object represents its total normalized investment capital level. Sizes can be interac-
tively changed with the CA VE wand. Each object’s color intensity represents its hourly profit
level.
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 313
Figure 4: SMART II VR Detail Mode
NOTE: SMART = Spot Market Agent Research Tool; VR = virtual reality.
Figure 5: SMART II VR Speed Mode
NOTE: SMART = Spot Market Agent Research Tool; VR = virtual reality.

In SMART II VR, interconnections are displayed as red tubes. The size of each tube repre-
sents its normalized transmission capacity level. Sizes can be interactively changed with the
CA VE wand. Each tube’s color intensity represents its hourly utilization level.
SMART II+
SMART II+ is a Swarm-based (Burkhart et al., 2000; Panepento, 2000) extension to
SMART II. SMART II+ includes an integrated set of agents and interconnections represent-
ing each of the following:
• the electric power marketing and transmission infrastructure;
• the natural gas marketing and distribution infrastructure;
• the interconnections between the two infrastructures in the form of natural gas–fired electric
generators.
Both of the infrastructures modeled in SMART II+ include many features:
• two different kinds of agents, producers and consumers, represent the market participants;
• interconnections represent transmission or distribution systems with capacities on each line or
pipe and complex routing;
• important economic issues are considered such as investment capital, demand growth for suc-
cessful consumers, new generation capacity for profitable producers, and bankruptcy for non-
competitive organizations;
• components can be disabled in real time to simulate failures.
The electric power infrastructure includes the added feature of natural gas–fired electric
generators. These generators buy fuel from the natural gas market. The resulting electricity is
then sold in the electric power market.
SMART II+ Time Management
SMART II+ is implemented in Swarm (Booch, 1994). This focuses the model on a
time-stepped approach to time management. Furthermore, SMART II+ models use a cyclic
bidding process during market clearing. This further focuses it on time-stepped simulation.
SMART II+ Producer Agents
SMART II+ producers determine their production level based on the potential profit to be
made. Each producer has investment capital that is increased by profits and reduced by
losses. If a producer reaches a predetermined level of investment capital, it can purchase
additional production capacity in the form of new electric generators or new natural gas
sources. New producers are similar to their owner and can connect to the distribution net -
work in either the same location or a new one. Producers who run out of investment capital go
bankrupt and no longer participate in the market. Producers choose whether to sell energy
based on either their cost curves or natural gas prices.
Standard producers derive their costs and capacities from cost curves with maximum gen-
eration limits as shown in Figure 6. Both costs and capacities are exogenous. SMART II+
producer agents obey the same basic rules as SMART II generation agents, with the excep-
tion of natural gas–fired electric generator agents.
314 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW

Natural gas–fired electric generation agents derive their costs and capacities from the nat-
ural gas market. These agents are consumers in the natural gas marketplace. Their costs are
based on the price they pay for natural gas. Their capacities are based on both the amount of
natural gas they can purchase and their design limits.
The rules for natural gas–fired electric generation agents are as follows:
• If the agent made a profit in the last hour, then attempt to increase natural gas purchases and offer
more electrical generation capacity.
• If the agent posted a loss in the last hour, then attempt to decrease natural gas purchases and offer
more electrical generation capacity.
• If the total profit has risen above the investment level for a new unit, then purchase a new genera-
tor. Select the new generator type based on a combination of the parent’s fuel source and the
availability of natural gas.
• If the total profit has fallen to zero, then go bankrupt.
Producer simulation display appearance depends on current profit levels (Figure 7).
SMART II+ Consumer Agents
SMART II+ consumer agents buy energy for their own use. Businesses buy fixed amounts
of energy to remain in business. Populations buy fixed amounts of energy to live their lives.
Natural gas–fired electric generators buy natural gas to produce salable electric power.
Each consumer has investment capital that is increased by profits and reduced by losses. If
a consumer reaches a predetermined level of investment capital, it can grow in the form of
new consumers. Consumers who run out of investment capital go bankrupt and no longer
participate in the market.
Consumer simulation display appearance depends on current profit levels (Figure 8).
Investment capital represents several things. For industrial users, it is their total financial
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 315
0
50
100
150
200
0 500 1000 1500 2000
MWh
$/MWh
Cost
/K32/K35/K30
/K33/K30/K30
Figure 6: An Example Producer Cost Curve

capital. For individuals, it is the employment and personal opportunities that keep them in an
area or encourage them to leave.
SMART II+ Interconnections
Interconnections represent transmission lines or distribution pipes each with an individ-
ual capacity limit. Individual capacity limits vary by interconnection type. Central transmis-
sion lines or main distribution pipes have high-capacity limits and are drawn with thick
marks. Outlying transmission lines or secondary distribution pipes have moderate-capacity
limits and are drawn with medium marks. Feeder lines or pipes have low-capacity limits and
are drawn with thin marks. Interconnection color represents contents and usage as shown in
Figure 9.
SMART II+ Market Indicators
The key SMART II+ market indicators are market prices, unserved energy, and natural
gas–fired electric generator market share. All key SMART II+ indicators are represented by
graphs updated in real time.
316 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW
Profitable producers appear as light green circles
Unprofitable producers appear as dark green circles
Bankrupt producers appear as dark rings
Figure 7: Producer Appearance
Profitable consumers appear as light green circles
Unprofitable consumers appear as dark green circles
Bankrupt consumers appear as dark green rings
Figure 8: Consumer Appearance

Market price is the per unit purchase price of the given energy resource. Electric power
prices are given in tenths of a cent per kilowatt-hour (Mills/KWh). Natural gas prices are
given in dollars per thousand cubic feet ($/1,000 cubic feet). The SMART II+ price graphs
are shown in Figure 10.
Unserved energy (UE) is the energy demand that was not met by the market. UE repre-
sents a form of market failure. UE is given as a percentage of total energy demand. The
SMART II+ UE graph is shown in Figure 11.
Natural gas–fired electric generator market share (NG Generator MS) is a measure of the
electric generation capacity that is supplied by natural gas units. NG Generator MS is key to
infrastructure interdependency. NG Generator MS is given as a percentage of total capacity.
The SMART II+ NG Generator MS graph is also shown in Figure 11.
6.5. SMART II+ Network Display
The geographic SMART II+ display is based on an equivalenced network. An example
notional SMART II+ network is shown in Figure 12.
SMART II+ seeks to apply CAS techniques to investigate system reliability in the face of
cascading failures. As such, the focus is on modeling a large number of infrastructures with
properties approximating those of real equivalenced electrical systems.
To achieve the goal of modeling a large number of electrical infrastructures, SMART II+
uses probability distributions to create example networks. These distributions are carefully
chosen to approximate real equivalenced electrical systems. This approach allows many net-
works to be rapidly created and simulated. The result is a broad understanding of the eco -
nomic issues that surround general electric infrastructures. It is possible to fix the SMART
II+ distributions to particular values to model specific, real-world networks. However, to
provide more detail on individual electric infrastructures, the approach followed by FAST is
recommended.
SMART II+ Validation and Calibration
As with SMART II, SMART II+ has undergone initial qualitative validation by matching
its outputs to basic analytic predictions. Markets with a single superior producer among a
large number of higher cost competitors have been tested. Also, markets with many identical
participants have been tested.
SMART II+ has undergone initial qualitative calibration by comparing the model’s natu-
ral gas–fired electric generator market share trends with those found in real systems. Much
more work is clearly required to quantitatively validate and quantitatively calibrate SMART
II+; therefore, only limited qualitative insights are currently being derived.
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 317
/K48/K69/K67/K68 /K55/K73/K61/K67/K65 /K69/K73 /K4C/K69/K67/K68/K74/K4C/K6F/K77 /K55/K73/K61/K67/K65 /K69/K73 /K44/K61/K72/K6B
/K4E/K61/K74/K75/K72/K61/K6C /K67/K61/K73 /K70/K69/K70/K65/K73 /K61/K70/K70/K65/K61/K72 /K62/K6C/K75/K65
/K45/K6C/K65/K63/K74/K72/K69/K63/K61/K6C /K6C/K69/K6E/K65/K73 /K61/K70/K70/K65/K61/K72 /K72/K65/K64
Figure 9: Interconnection Appearance

SMART II+ Insights
As originally presented to our research sponsors in May 2000, preliminary insights from
SMART II+ indicate that rising the natural gas–fired electric generator market share radi -
cally increases market interdependence. This increasing market interdependence can pit the
electric power and natural gas markets against each other during simultaneous failures
because both markets are fighting for the same underlying resource, natural gas. This inter-
dependency insight was borne out in the aftermath of the recent El Paso natural gas pipeline
explosion.
What is the state of the world today? Nationwide natural gas–fired electric generator mar-
ket share is roughly 15% to 20%. Nationwide natural gas–fired electric generator market
share is expected to radically increase during the next 5 years. J. P. Morgan analysts predict
that there is expected to be a 31% increase in generation capacity (Anderson, 2000). These
analysts predict that roughly 95% of new electric generation capacity will come from natural
318 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW
Figure 11: UE and NG Generator MS Graph
NOTE: UE = unserved energy; NG Generator MS = natural gas–fired electric generator market share.
Figure 10: Price Graphs

gas–fired units (Anderson, 2000). An example is the midwestern region dominated by Com-
monwealth Edison (ComEd).
ComEd presently gets less than 10% of its current 20,000 MW generation capacity from
natural gas–fired generators. Permits are being issued for the construction of 8,000 MW of
new capacity, of which more than 95% will be natural gas fired.
The interdependency between the electric power and natural gas markets implies that
when natural gas–fired electric generator market share becomes high enough, a single
energy resource, “virtual natural gas,” is being traded in both markets. Viewing energy sys-
tems from the perspective of virtual natural gas suggests that future electric system capacity
expansion planning should explicitly feature the natural gas distribution infrastructure as a
key component. Power systems engineers should note that electric models might be substan-
tially incomplete without explicitly including the natural gas infrastructure. Highly distrib-
uted electric generation plans including local load-servicing schemes may especially benefit
from this view because they rely heavily on the existence of other energy sources such as nat-
ural gas.
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 319
Figure 12: Example Notional SMART II+ Network
NOTE: SMART = Spot Market Research Tool.

FAST
FAST is an integrated infrastructure model based on SMART II+. FAST includes many of
the features of SMART II+ along with improvements in modeling infrastructure, detail, and
fidelity. FAST is currently under construction. FAST has three components: (a) The first is
the runtime infrastructure called FAST:Run that will be merged with RePast (Collier &
Sallach, 2001), (b) the second is the electric power system model called FAST:E, and (c) the
third is the natural gas system model called FAST:G.
FAST:Run is designed to be a lightweight large-scale system with the major features that
(a) it is written entirely in Java, (b) it is fully distributed, and (c) it has a multithreaded sched-
uler that focuses on maximizing parallel execution.
FAST Time Management
The underlying design paradigm of FAST is that of a time continuum ranging from
decades to seconds. On the scale of decades, the focus is long-term human decisions con -
strained by economics:
• Radical technology changes are possible.
• Radical legal/regulatory environmental changes are possible.
• Radical market structure changes are possible.
• Radical demand change is possible.
• Radical capacity expansion is possible.
• Radical business model changes are possible.
On the scale of years, the focus is short-term human economic decisions constrained by
economics:
• Radical legal/regulatory environmental changes are possible.
• Radical market structure changes are possible.
• Substantial demand change is possible.
• Substantial capacity expansion is possible.
• Substantial business model changes are possible.
On the scale of months and days, the focus is short-term human economic decisions con-
strained by economics and physical laws:
• Substantial price change (e.g., fuels, power) is possible.
• Substantial demand change is possible.
• Small business models changes are possible.
• Substantial component failures are possible.
On the scale of hours, the focus is short-term human economic decisions constrained by
physical laws and economics:
• Moderate demand change is possible.
• Substantial component failures are possible.
On the scale of minutes or less, the focus is on physical laws:
• Small demand changes are possible.
• Substantial component failures are possible.
320 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW

On longer time scales, human economic decisions are emphasized. On shorter time
scales, physical laws dominate. FAST includes a large number of different agents to model
these varying time scales. Modeling across the full range of time scales is necessary to under-
stand the complex infrastructure interdependencies between the electric power and natural
gas markets.
Many agents representing real-world entities have a set of basic functions that are acti-
vated on a periodic basis during each model run. Typically, these activations will occur at
hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly intervals during runs. The agents also occasion-
ally will be activated at irregular intervals for special tasks. A combination of regular peri-
odic activation combined with occasional irregular activation forms the core structure of the
FAST agent-based simulation approach. The FAST classes that implement these concepts
follow.
The new classes that implement the core structure of the FAST agent-based simulation
focus on activities. Activities can either be specific tasks or collections of subtasks. The
subtasks may either be sequential or concurrent. In all cases, tasks may begin and end at spe-
cific times. These ideas are embodied in the specific FAST interfaces.
Interfaces in OOP reflect a general contract for functionality without a specific imple -
mentation (Booch, 1994). The contract details the names and parameters of the available
functions without saying how those functions are actually coded. This allows interface users
to write working programs that are independent of any particular interface implementation.
Users are free to choose any implementation that is available. At the same time, interface
writers maintain maximum implementation flexibility. They can even use completely differ-
ent implementation approaches without affecting users.
For example, one interface implementation might be local and sequential. It would pro-
vide the type of code most people imagine when they think of a simple computer program. A
second implementation might use Java Remote Method Invocation (RMI) to distribute the
computation across a Beowulf cluster. Both the standard and RMI approaches could use the
same interfaces so no user code changes would be required to switch implementations. In
fact, this is exactly what FAST does. All of the classes in the FAST hierarchy use interfaces to
maximize internal and external flexibility.
FAST Agents
Many FAST agents are relatively “thick” compared with typical agents. FAST agents are
highly specialized to perform diverse tasks ranging from acting as independent system oper-
ators to being transmission lines. To support specialization, FAST agents include large num-
bers of highly specific rules.
More than 20 unique FAST agents are being created to model the electric and natural gas
infrastructures in detail. An example is the electric generator agent with the following basic
considerations:
• Electric generator agents simulate the physical characteristics of an individual electric
generator.
• There will be many different types of generator agents including thermal generators, hydroelec-
tric generators, renewable generation systems, combined heat and power generators, and others.
• Generators themselves do not adapt; all decisions on their operation are made by generation
company agents.
• Random events can affect electric generator operations (e.g., unplanned outages).
• Multiple generators may be physically connected to a single node in the network.
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 321

• A generator may be the only supply owned by a given generation company agent, or it could be
one of several owned by a given generation company agent.
• A generator may have shared ownership with several generation company agents.
Overall, the electric generator agents have limited ability to adapt to their environment.
They must operate within their physical limits. If these limits are exceeded or are about to be
exceeded, the electric generator will trip out. If it does, it must follow its physical rules for
restarting before becoming available again.
The generation company that owns the unit makes operating decisions that address issues
other than the physical limits. Examples of such issues include economic decisions on
whether to operate the plant and, if so, at what level.
A simplified set of example steps for generator agents working in the hourly market is as
follows:
• Receive the committed capacity for the next 24 hours.
• For each hour:
• Calculate the available capacity for the next hour.
• Distribute the available capacity to the committed generation categories.
• Send the results to the real-time dispatch agent.
• Receive feedback from the real-time dispatch agent.
• Determine if the generator has tripped as a result of the dispatch.
• Calculate generator results.
Detailed rules are provided for each step. For example, the rules for generator tripping are
as follows:
• If the dispatched capacity received from the real-time dispatch agent for the given generator in
the specific hour is less than the generator’s minimum capacity, then trip out the generator.
• If the dispatched capacity received from the real-time dispatch agent for the given generator in
the specific hour is greater than the generator’s maximum capacity, then trip out the generator.
• If the generator has instantaneously failed, then trip out the generator.
FAST Networks
FAST will use specific data from actual equivalenced electric and natural gas systems.
These data will be created manually by power systems and natural gas systems experts in
close coordination with ABM experts. The close coordination will be necessary due to the
emergent behavior of CAS.
The emergent behavior of CAS implies that many model results cannot be predicted until
the simulation is actually run. The presence of emergent behavior means that modelers
should develop simulations in an iterative manner much like that of the spiral software engi-
neering model (Schach, 1993).
The FAST system and its component agents will be subjected to rigorous quantitative val-
idation and calibration. This process will include matching the outputs from FAST under the
following scenarios:
• Basic analytic predictions such as markets with a single superior producer among a large num-
ber of higher cost competitors and markets with many identical participants will be tested.
• Existing test cases from recognized organizations such as those created by the Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) will be used (IEEE, 1973a, 1973b).
322 SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER REVIEW

• Known events such as the California electricity price spikes and the El Paso natural gas pipeline
explosion will be tested.
• A variety of special purpose cases will be created and investigated.
CONCLUSION
Developing the initial capability to create CAS models requires substantial organiza -
tional investment as demonstrated by the SMART and FAST efforts. Once this initial invest-
ment has been made, models can be created that allow innovate studies. Argonne National
Laboratory has made this investment by creating both SMART and FAST and applying
SMART.
REFERENCES
Anderson, J. A. (2000, September 19) . What’s electrifying natural gas? Business Week Online [Online]. Available:
http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/sep2000/nf20000919_238.htm
Booch, G. (1994).Object-oriented analysis and design with applications(2nd ed.). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Burkhart, R., Askenazi, M., & Minar, N. (2000). Swarm release documentation [Online]. Available:
http://www.santafe.edu/projects/swarm/swarmdocs/set/set.html
Collier, N., & Sallach, D. (2001). RePast [Online]. Available:http://repast.sourceforge.net/
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. (1973a).14-bus IEEE transmission test system. New York: Author.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Working Group on a Common Format for the Exchange of Solved
Load Flow Data. (1973b, November/December). Common data format for the exchange of solved load flow
data. IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, 6, 1916-1925.
Panepento, P. (2000, August 14). The perfect swarm.Computerworld, p. 56.
Pape, D., Cruz-Neira, C., & Czernuszenko, M. (2000). CAVE user’s guide [Online]. Available:
http://www.evl.uic.edu/pape/CAVE/prog/CAVEGuide.html (1997).
Schach, S. (1993). Software engineering (2nd ed.). Homewood, IL: Irwin.
VanKuiken, J. C., Veselka, T. D., Guziel, K. A., Blodgett, D. W., Hamilton, S., Kavicky, J. A., Koritarov, V . S.,
North, M. J., Novickas, A. A., Paprockas, K. R., Portante, E. C., & Willing, D. L. (1994).APEX user’s guide
(Argonne production, expansion, and exchange model for electrical systems), Version 3.0. (ANL/DIS/TM-21).
Argonne, IL: Argonne National Laboratory.
Veselka, T. D., Portante, E. C., Koritarov, V . S., Hamilton, S., VanKuiken, J. C., Paprockas, K. R., North, M. J.,
Kavicky, J. A., Guziel, K. A., Poch, L. A., Folga, S., Tompkins, M. M., & Novickas, A. A. (1994).Impacts of
western area power administration’s power marketing alternatives on electric utility systems (ANL/DIS/
TM-10). Argonne, IL: Argonne National Laboratory.
Michael J. North is the lead CAS software engineer in Argonne National Laboratory’s Decision and Infor-
mation Sciences Division CAS Section, where he has spent 8 years modeling infrastructures such as electri-
cal transmission systems, natural gas distribution systems, and military logistics systems. A graduate of the
Illinois Institute of Technology, he holds nine earned college degrees spanning computer science, computer
systems engineering, mathematics, engineering science, physics, biology, chemistry, and business adminis-
tration. He can be reached via e-mail at Decision and Information Sciences Division, Complex Adaptive
Systems Section, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Ave., Argonne, IL 60439; phone: (630)
252-6234; e-mail:north@anl.gov.
North / AGENT-BASED MODELING 323
