Towards Realistic Market Simulations: a Generative Adversarial
Networks Approach
Andrea Coletta
Matteo Prata
Michele Conti
Emanuele Mercanti
Novella Bartolini
Sapienza University of Rome
Rome, Italy
Aymeric Moulin
Svitlana Vyetrenko
Tucker Balch
J.P. Morgan AI Research
New York, USA
ABSTRACT
Simulated environments are increasingly used by trading ￿rms and
investment banks to evaluate trading strategies before approach-
ing real markets. Backtesting, a widely used approach, consists of
simulating experimental strategies while replaying historical mar-
ket scenarios. Unfortunately, this approach does not capture the
market response to the experimental agents’ actions. In contrast,
multi-agent simulation presents a natural bottom-up approach to
emulating agent interaction in ￿nancial markets. It allows to set
up pools of traders with diverse strategies to mimic the ￿nancial
market trader population, and test the performance of new exper-
imental strategies. Since individual agent-level historical data is
typically proprietary and not available for public use, it is di￿cult
to calibrate multiple market agents to obtain the realism required
for testing trading strategies. To addresses this challenge we pro-
pose a synthetic market generator based on Conditional Generative
Adversarial Networks (CGANs) trained on real aggregate-level his-
torical data. A CGAN-based "world" agent can generate meaningful
orders in response to an experimental agent. We integrate our syn-
thetic market generator into ABIDES, an open source simulator of
￿nancial markets. By means of extensive simulations we show that
our proposal outperforms previous work in terms of stylized facts
re￿ecting market responsiveness and realism.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies ! Arti￿cial intelligence; Multi-
agent systems; Modeling and simulation.
ACM Reference Format:
Andrea Coletta, Matteo Prata, Michele Conti, Emanuele Mercanti, Novella
Bartolini, Aymeric Moulin, Svitlana Vyetrenko, and Tucker Balch. 2021.
Towards Realistic Market Simulations: a Generative Adversarial Networks
Approach. In 2nd ACM International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF’21),
November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3490354.3494411
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for pro￿t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ￿rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci￿c permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9148-1/21/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3490354.3494411
1 INTRODUCTION
The standard approach in the evaluation of trading strategies be-
fore their adoption in real markets, is to simulate their performance
under a wide range of existing historical scenarios — a technique
known as backtesting. Despite its common use in trading appli-
cations due to its simplicity, the backtesting approach does not
allow to simulate market response to experimental agents’ actions,
which makes it unreliable for simulating the execution of trading
strategies.
Interactive Agent-Based Simulators (IABS) address the limita-
tions of the backtesting approach by modeling the interplay of
individual traders, the agents, of a market system. They are a fun-
damental tool in ￿nancial research for studying and testing trad-
ing strategies, while also providing market behavior explainability
[20, 24]. An agent-based simulation allows to study the market
response to the experimental agents and enables “what if” studies
on how their strategy would perform [ 3]. IABS are increasingly
being used for training of machine learning based trading strate-
gies [5, 17, 26], and deepen the study of real market phenomena
[4, 31, 33].
While most market simulators are used for internal purposes
within trading ￿rms, robust simulators for high-￿delity market sim-
ulation environments are becoming available also for the research
community. One example in this direction is ABIDES (Agent-Based
Interactive Discrete Event Simulation) [7].
Modeling a realistic market behavior is a major challenge, com-
mon to all the described works. To obtain realistic simulations, these
approaches rely on pools of hand-crafted experimental agents to
mimic the complexity of a real market. Along this line of research,
previous works [6, 12, 23] analyzed traders’ behaviors through mar-
ket data-sets and described a series of trading strategies. However,
a real stock market includes thousands of participants adopting di-
verse proprietary trading strategies. Historical data typically lacks
complete details of trader population and of the adopted strategies.
Therefore, it is often impossible to exactly understand the traders’
behaviors, and to precisely mimic them through simulated agents.
This inevitably leads to poorly realistic simulations, and as a result
“what if” studies may give inaccurate results [30].
To the best of our knowledge, we are ￿rst to propose a GAN-
based framework that is able to learn an abstract representation of
the market that can also react to the observed market state. The
proposed framework leverages a Conditional Generative Adver-
sarial Network (CGAN) [ 13, 21] trained on real historical data, to

ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Cole￿a et al.
capture the market’s behavior as a whole arising from the activity
of di￿erent participants. The CGAN is trained to generate limit
orders conditioned by the currently observed market situation. A
world agent impersonated by a pre-trained CGAN that is placed
in a simulation environment, produces orders to be processed by
the exchange. This agent represents the whole ensemble of trading
agents of the particular symbol on which it was trained. Such sim-
ulation test-bed allows to evaluate any experimental agent, while
guaranteeing realism of the produced market trend and market
responsiveness to the experimental agent’s activity.
We show that the market traces generated by the proposed
CGAN-based agent preserve the statistical properties of histori-
cal data, and at the same time expose a reactive behavior against
experimental agents.
Here we summarize the original contributions of this paper:
• We propose a framework able to automatically learn and
reproduce the market behavior, allowingrealistic and reactive
simulations.
• We propose a CGAN architecture able to generate synthetic
market data, in terms of limit orders, as a function of the
features observed from the current market situation, thus
guaranteeing both market realism and reactivity to experi-
mental agents.
• We analyze the realism of generated orders and study the re-
activity of the simulation framework to experimental agents
by comparing simulations conducted with and without them.
• We compare our CGAN based simulations against a state of
the art IABS [30], showing that our architecture outperforms
existing approaches, exhibiting more realistic properties in
terms of stylized facts of a Limit Order Book (LOB) [8, 9].
2 RELATED WORK
IABSs are increasingly gaining attention by the research commu-
nity, with several works studying simulators and solutions to closely
mimic real markets [7, 11, 17, 23, 30].
Farmer et al. [ 11] study market simulations showing how zero
intelligence (ZI) agents, which place random orders, are able to
reproduce market dynamics (i.e., spread and price) and react to the
arrival of new orders. Palit et al. [ 23] deepen the study of ZI agents
in market simulations, showing that they can also reproduce fat
tails and long range dependencies.
In a recent work [ 30], S. Vyetrenko et al. survey metrics to assess
robust and realistic market simulations. The authors study two
di￿erent agent con￿gurations showing how IABS con￿gurations
that still rely on common sense hand-crafted rules may produce un-
realistic market scenarios. In the experimental section, we compare
our framework against their agent con￿gurations and evaluate the
related realism metrics.
Other approaches to achieve realistic simulations focus on auto-
matic learning strategies. An action conditional stochastic forward
model (otherwise known as a world model) was previously used
to learn market response to trading from historical data [ 15, 32].
The model is implemented via a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) autoencoder followed by Mixture-Density Recurrent Net-
work (RNN-MDN), and is subsequently used for reinforcement
Figure 1: An example of order book.
learning trading agent training, but is not tested for simulated
realism.
Other works in the literature focus on producing synthetic ￿nan-
cial time-series, retaining statistical properties of historical data,
[2, 10, 18, 27, 34]. For example, Junyi Li et al. [ 18] propose an ap-
proach to generate realistic and high-￿delity stock market order
streams, based on GANs. The proposed Stock-GAN model employs
a Conditional Wasserstein GAN to capture the history dependence
of orders. The goal of this study is to generate synthetic data that
does not include features that may link back to the originator of
the order in the training data-set, for anonymity reasons.
However, none of these works address the issue of responsiveness
and reactivity to experimental agents.
3 BACKGROUND
In this section we brie￿y review some important pillars that are
useful for the reader to approach this paper.
Orders and Limit Order Book . In ￿nancial markets, traders
can participate in the auction mechanism by placing orders to buy
[bid] or sell [ask] shares of the ￿nancial assets of choice. There are
two major types of orders: (1) market orders, which are executed
immediately at the best available price, i.e. highest buy (lowest sell)
price in case of a sell (buy) market order; (2) limit orders, which,
unlike the market orders, include the speci￿cation of a desired
target price. A sell (buy) limit order will be executed only when is
matched to a buy (sell) order whose price is greater than (lower
than) or equal to the target price. The exchange matching engine is
responsible for matching the incoming buy and sell orders issued
by the trading agents. Figure 1 shows the LOB of a ￿nancial asset,
which is an electronic record of the orders issued by the traders.
LOBs are maintained at ￿nancial exchanges, such as NASDAQ
and NYSE, and act as an indicator of the supply and demand of a
particular asset in time. They are organized by price levels and are
continuously updated as new orders are placed.
Stylized Facts of ￿nancial markets. From the analysis of the
market and LOB evolution over time, several metrics (e.g., spread,
mid-price, relative return) and other statistical properties (e.g., ab-
sence of autocorrelation or fat-tailed distribution of asset relative
returns) can be derived. These statistical properties capture the
market behavior over di￿erent time periods, and are often referred
to as stylized facts [8, 9].

Towards Realistic Market Simulations: a Generative Adversarial Networks Approach ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
Figure 2: CGAN-Based Simulation Framework.
 Figure 3: IABS Simulation Framework.
One can calculate stylized facts for the time-series produced by
agent interactions for real and simulated markets, and use them
as metrics of simulation realism [ 30]. In our work, we consider
a set of the most commonly used stylized facts to evaluate how
our CGAN-based "world" agent is able to reproduce characteristic
features of a real market. We study the following stylized facts:
• Absence of Autocorrelation . The linear autocorrelation
of the return ⇠ (g) = corr(A (C,  C),A (C +g,  C)) rapidly decays
to zero in few minutes and becomes insigni￿cant for periods
longer than 20 minutes.
• Volatility Clustering. High-volatility events tend to cluster
in time, showing a positive autocorrelation over several days
of trading.
• Volume/Volatility correlation. The trading volume is pos-
itively correlated with volatility.
• Heavy tails and aggregation normality . The asset re-
turns follow a normal distribution with fat tails. Notice that,
fat tails disappear when the time period  C use to compute
the returns increases.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) . GANs [ 13] are a
powerful subclass of generative models and were successfully ap-
plied to image generation and editing, semi-supervised learning,
and domain adaptation.
With GANs, we have a two-player game between the generator
⌧, learning how to generate samples resembling real data, and a
discriminator (or critic)⇡, learning to discriminate between real and
generated data. Both players aim to minimize their own cost, and the
solution to the game is the Nash equilibrium where neither player
can improve its cost unilaterally [ 19]. In this paper, we consider
a generator ⌧ to learn how to produce new orders, matching real
orders statistical properties. In the GAN framework the model
learns a deterministic transformation ⌧ of a simple distribution
?I , with the goal of matching the real data distribution ?3 . On
the other hand, ?I is the distribution of the generated data, that
is implicitly de￿ned as ˜G = ⌧ (I), where I ⇠N ( 0, 1) is the input
noise to the generator, sampled from a normal distribution. Random
noise as input to ⌧ ensures variance of the generated data. The
transformation ⇡ is trained to maximize the probability of assigning
the correct label to both training examples G ⇠ ?3 and ˜G ⇠ ?I ,
while at the same time ⌧ is trained to minimize the probability of
⇡ assigning the correct label.
The novelty of our work is the design of a synthetic market order
generator whose behavior reacts to the activity of experimental
agents, resembling realistic markets. To this end, while in its most
basic form a GAN generator takes random noise as its input to
transform noise into a meaningful output, we consider a Condi-
tional Generative Adversarial Network (CGAN) [ 1] which takes as
input also several features that characterize the emulated market
behavior.
This translates into a joint two-player minimax game that can
be described by the following dynamic:
min
⌧
max
⇡
EG⇠?3
[log(⇡ (G |~))]   E
I⇠N( 0, 1)
[log(⇡ (⌧ (I|~)))] , (1)
where ~ is some extra information that conditions the players’
behavior. The minimax game derives from the cross-entropy be-
tween the real and generated distributions. Thus log(⇡ (G |~)) and
log(⇡ (⌧ (I|~))) re￿ect the likelihood that the discriminator cor-
rectly classi￿es real data G given ~, or generated data ⌧ (I|~) re-
spectively. The generator ⌧ cannot directly a￿ect the log(⇡ (G |~))
term, thus for him minimizing the loss is equivalent to maximizing
log(⇡ (⌧ (I|~))) as it is a negative additive quantity.
4 CGAN-BASED SIMULATION FRAMEWORK
The proposed simulation framework, represented in Figure 2, in-
cludes four main components:
(1) The electronic market exchange, which handles incoming
orders.
(2) One or more experimental agents, which operate the trad-
ing strategy under investigation.
(3) The CGAN-based "world" agent, which is responsible for
emulating the market behavior, by generating new orders as
a function of the current market state.
(4) The historical data, which is used to train the CGAN agent
and to initialize the simulation.
In contrast to IABS simulations where experimental agents in-
teract with multiple diverse market participants via an exchange
to mimic a real market (Figure 3), we consider a unique CGAN-
based agent, acting as the whole trader population (Figure 2). In
fact, while market behavior is typically modeled through multiple
heterogeneous agents in IABS simulations, these approaches fail in
guaranteeing the necessary realism and responsiveness [30].
The lack of knowledge about traders and their strategy in his-
torical data, motivates poorly realistic simulations.

ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Cole￿a et al.
In our simulation framework, a CGAN-based agent is trained on
historical data to emulate the behavior resulting from the whole
set of traders. It analyzes the order book entries and mimics the
market behavior by producing new limit orders depending on the
current market state. Thus, the experimental agents interact with
the CGAN-based agent through the exchange, enabling the test
and the study of their strategy against a responsive and realistic
market.
4.1 Electronic Market Exchange Simulator
The electronic market exchange handles the LOB of a set of securi-
ties, applying a price-then-FIFO matching rule for the trading orders
issued by the agents. For our simulations we use ABIDES [ 7]. It is
an open-source simulator that provides a selection of background
agent types (such as market markers, fundamental value investors,
momentum traders, etc.), a NASDAQ-like exchange agent which
lists any number of securities for trade using a LOB with price-then-
FIFO matching rules, and a simulation kernel which manages the
advancement of time and handles all inter-agent communications.
4.2 Experimental Agents
An experimental agent is an entity of a ￿nancial IABS, representing
a ￿nancial trader adopting a speci￿c trading strategy. It owns a
portfolio, pending orders and initial cash. Experimental agents are
implemented to evaluate the performance of their trading strategy,
taking into account agent actions’ impact in the estimated prof-
itability, or to pursue “what if” studies.
Any trading strategy can be implemented inside an experimental
agent introduced in the simulation, including machine learning
based ones [17].
For instance, in our experimental analysis in Section 5, we use
an experimental agent which injects orders so as to reach a given
cumulative volume within a prede￿ned interval of time. We refer
to this agent with the name of Percentage of Volume (POV) experi-
mental agent [30]. We use this agent in our simulations to evaluate
the responsiveness of our CGAN-based "world" agent.
4.3 CGAN-based World Agent
The core component of our framework is the CGAN-based "world"
agent, which mimics the market behavior. To this end, our CGAN
architecture takes as input a set of features, representing the cur-
rent market condition, and generates the next order to feed into
the exchange. The new order is processed by the exchange and
the simulation advances, generating a new market state, and a sub-
sequent new order from the CGAN. Thus, while common GAN
models output data from input random noise, the proposed CGAN,
in addition, is fed with some meaningful features to condition the
data generation. We consider a similar architecture of Junyi et al.
[18], based on the conditional WGAN [ 1, 21], adapted to cope with
our task and to react in a simulated environment.
Output data. The output of the proposed CGAN-based "world"
agent is what CGAN generator ⌧ generates, that is a single order ˜G.
Formally the output is a 4-tuple ˜G = (price, volume, direction, time),
where: direction 2{  1, 1} represents sell and buy orders respec-
tively; and time is the interarrival time between two consecutive
orders, more precisely it is the o￿set w.r.t. the previous order. After
this time, the order is placed into the exchange, and the CGAN is
triggered to generate another order.
Input data. The input of the proposed CGAN-based experimen-
tal agent is made of a vector ~ responsible for the conditional nature
of the method and random noise vector I to provide diversity to
generated traces.
In more details, a vector ~ is used to condition the generator
output. At time C the 8-th element of the vector with 8 2[ 1,# ],
represents a series of 10 features linked to a trading order issued
at time C   8. Speci￿cally, ~ 2 R10· # . The features are the 4-tuple
mentioned in the previous paragraph representing the order details,
that is (price, volume, direction, time), concatenated to the 6-tuple
made of the following features (best-bid price, best-bid volume, best-
ask price, best-ask volume, mid-price, time-period). As shown in [ 18],
most of the sent orders are strongly driven by the current mid-price
and order book state, making these features particularly adequate
to in￿uence future orders. In order to avoid instabilities in the train-
ing process of the CGAN, we normalize ~ with a min-max scaler,
between -1 and 1. As for the size, time, best-bid volume, and best-ask
volume they are pre-processed with a box-cox transformation [ 25]
in order to reduce anomalies and normally distribute the data.
Finally, features vectorI constitutes part of the input. This vector
is made of #5 noise features sampled from a normal distribution.
Notice that the concatenation between noise and historical infor-
mation of the market is necessary. The latter maintain ￿delity of
the generated data with respect to the historical data: our agent
has to issue seemingly real orders, and this can be done only if it
has up-to-date knowledge of the market state. Instead, the noise
guarantees signi￿cant variance in the generated new orders. Noise
samples vary at varying simulation seeds, allowing the generation
of diverse market behaviors. In the experiments, we considered
# = 50 and #5 = 50.
CGAN Architecture. We want our model to generate realistic
orders providing responsiveness conditional on the current market
state. To do so, we use a CGAN [ 21]. Input noise from the prior and
extra information ~ (i.e., features about current market situation)
are combined and fed into both the generator and the discrimina-
tor. State of the art Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network
with Gradient Penalty (WGAN-GP) is adopted. In order to address
training instabilities due to exploding and vanishing gradients, we
introduce additional terms and constraints in the loss function as
suggested in [ 14]. In fact, loss function is constructed using the
Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality [29], and considering as discrim-
inator a 1-Lipschitz function (i.e. a function which norm of the
gradients is upper-bounded by 1). Thus the used loss is:
min
⌧
max
⇡
EG⇠?3
[⇡ (G |~)]   E
I⇠N( 0, 1)
[⇡ (⌧ (I|~))]+
_E
I⇠N( 0, 1)
[( kr⇡ (⌧ (I|~)) k2   1)2] (2)
where the weight _ is set to 10 as in [14].
Figure 4 shows the architecture of the CGAN. The generator ⌧
is responsible for producing a trading order ˜G=+1 ⇠ ⌧ (I|~) which
at best resembles characteristics of a real order. The input of the
generator is, the normally distributed noise I ⇠N ( 0, 1) and the
historical data vector ~ introduced in the previous section. Before

Towards Realistic Market Simulations: a Generative Adversarial Networks Approach ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
Figure 4: CGAN Architecture.
going through the generator, historical data vector ~ is fed into a
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [ 16] to capture the long-term
dependencies among historical traces features and producing a com-
pact encoding. The output of the LSTM is concatenated with the
normally distributed noise and passed through a series of convolu-
tional layers. CNNs are highly popular due to their ability to detect
patterns that are invariant for some transformation, depending on
the used ￿lter. We believe that these layers allow to extract relevant
information from the LSTM output, which has condensed the his-
tory and features of the current market scenario. The discriminator
⇡ takes as input data coming either from the generator or from the
data-set made of real orders. It outputs a real number representing
the distance between the input order and a real order.
4.4 Historical Data
The role of historical data in our proposed simulation framework is
twofold. First, our CGAN model needs order book data and order
messages for the training. The training is carried out in an unsu-
pervised fashion; the CGAN extracts sequences of historical orders,
trying to generate a plausible next order. The training can be either
performed on a single stock during a very tight time window (e.g.,
one/two days), or on multiple stocks and periods (e.g., one month).
In the former way, the trained network can be leveraged to repro-
duce very speci￿c trends of a certain stock, while in the latter the
trained CGAN can be used to emulate more general market trends.
In case of a single stock testing, the historical data is also used
to initialize the simulation. If we want to simulate a particular
symbol and day, we want to condition the CGAN-based agent with
real data at the beginning of the trading day. The input data let
the framework evaluate the market features, and feed them in the
CGAN to generate coherent orders for that day. The historical data
is only needed to start the simulation, as the CGAN-based agent
needs the input market condition (i.e., features y) to generate new
orders. However, if we want to simulate a scenario that is not linked
to any symbol nor day, it su￿ces to launch a run with experimental
agents that have the most diverse logic, to produce preliminary
data in the exchange, which are then fed into the CGAN to start
the generative process.
Notice that, considering the input features, an order book with
at least 1-level is needed, along with all the orders submitted to the
exchange. However, as our goal is to mimic the collective traders’
behavior (not per trader), no sensitive market data are required.
In our experiments we use data from LOBSTER [ 28], an online
limit order book data tool that provides high-quality limit order
book data, which are reconstructed from NASDAQ traded stocks. It
is worth noting that LOBSTER data has a speci￿c format that doesn’t
provide the full picture. We use a 20-level data-set. It is constituted
of: (1) the order book snapshot history (price and quantity for each
level) for the ￿rst 20 levels on each side (there is a new snapshot
every time a price of quantity changes in these levels); (2) the
stream of messages (add order, cancellation etc) related to the levels
displayed in the order book. Liquidity coming from orders placed
beyond 20th level is accounted for in the order book when that
price level becomes one of the 20 ￿rst, but the message that created
it is not represented in the data-set. It is a necessary approximation
for us in order to make computations tractable.
5 EXPERIMENTS
In this section we evaluate our framework under three main aspects.
First, we study our CGAN model performance in terms of training
convergence and statistical similarity of the generated orders to his-
torical ones. Then, we evaluate the main novelty of our framework
which is the ability to react to an experimental agent. In particular,
we show how the CGAN-based "world" agent reacts to the burst of
orders issued by a POV experimental agent. Finally, we evaluate
the realism of our CGAN-based simulations against a state of the
art approach. In particular we consider the work of S. Vyetrenko et
al. [30] which proposes pools of hand-crafted experimental agents
to mimic the complexity of a real market, and studies statistical
properties of the resulting synthetic traces.
We implement our framework extending ABIDES [ 7], an open-
source multi-agent simulator. We trained the model on order book
entries from AAPL and TSLA on 2 trading days. Each training

ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Cole￿a et al.
Figure 5: Comparison of CGAN syntethic and real TSLA orders - Stylized Facts during the training process, at beginning (top),
half (middle) and when it achieves reasonable convergence (bottom).
process lasts 4 days, running for 200 epochs on a NVIDIA V100
GPU [ 22]. The datasets are obtained from the LOBSTER archive
[28]. Being a conditional model, for the ￿rst minutes of simulation,
the CGAN "world" agent is fed with historical data coming from
the training set alone.
5.1 CGAN Model Performance
To evaluate the performance of our CGAN model we compare the
generated synthetic orders against the real training data, by looking
at their statistical properties. In particular, we consider the order
distributions over the price, volume, direction and inter-arrival time.
In fact, in order to assess the goodness of a generative model, it is
usual to compare the statistics of real and synthetic data, as the loss
value alone is not a good indicator of convergence [14].
Figure 5 shows the distributions of several useful features for
the synthetic and real traces. Speci￿cally, the columns from left to
right, plot the volume (i.e., number of shares), the price, the direction
(i.e., buy or sell order), and the interarrival time distribution of the
orders. The real data refers to TSLA stock on the 2nd and 3rd of
May 2019. All the order features are normalized as in Section 4.3.
The x-axis shows both the normalized form between [ 1, 1] and
the unnormalized value.
The ￿rst row shows the distributions at the beginning of the
training process (epoch number 3), in which the CGAN is clearly un-
able to generate realistic orders, mostly producing random output.
The second row shows an intermediate advancement of the training
process (epoch number 50). The CGAN learns to mimic the distri-
butions more accurately, especially for direction and inter-arrival
time. Finally, the third row shows a much more stable CGAN agent,
achieved after 120 training epochs. The agent generates orders re-
sembling real ones: direction, inter-arrival, price distributions show
a pattern that is close to real. Orders volumes are discretionary for
the traders, thus it is intrinsically hard to match the real distribution.
Figure 6 shows the CGAN "world" agent ability to replicate
trends observed during training, by generating orders that lead to
a price pattern that is close to that of the training data. The CGAN
was trained on a single stock with a tight time window (i.e., two
days). The generated trends allow pursuing studies on the speci￿c
historical scenarios. The chart shows the training data (solid red
line) and 5 generated traces (colored lines), which are conditioned,
at the beginning of the generation process with the historical data.
Figure 6: Comparison of multiple CGAN synthetic traces
(thin colored lines) and real TSLA real trace (fat red line).

Towards Realistic Market Simulations: a Generative Adversarial Networks Approach ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
Figure 7: Market replay (left) and CGAN-Based simulation
(right) with and without a _-POV execution agent. POV
agent places orders between 10:30 AM and 11:00 AM with
_ 2[ 0.01, 0.1, 0.25], respectively on top, middle and bottom
row. POV wake us frequency = 1 minute. The x-axes are trun-
cated and y-axes expanded for clarity.
5.2 Market Impact Experiment
We demonstrated that our CGAN model is able to generate orders
and time-series with properties resembling those of real historical
traces. An additional novelty of our framework is the ability to
represent all the market participants as a whole and respond to
the strategy of an experimental agent, thus allowing interactive
simulations. In particular, our CGAN-based "world" agent is trained
to generate trading limit orders conditioned by the currently ob-
served market situation. Therefore, as the orders submitted by any
experimental agent alter the market and the order book, they also
condition the CGAN agent and the evolution of the simulation (as
shown in Figure 2).
In order to evaluate the reactivity of our framework to the activity
of an experimental agent, we craft an experiment in which a POV
agent submits a burst of buy orders [3, 30]. A _-POV strategy is
de￿ned by a percentage level _ 2( 0, 1], a wake up period  C,
a direction, and a target quantity of shares g. The agent wakes
up every  C time units, observes the transacted volume in the
market since its last wake up +C , and issues buy or sell orders
of a number of shares equal to _+C , it does so until g shares are
transacted. In our experiments we consider three di￿erent _-POV
agent con￿gurations, with _ 2[ 0.01, 0.1, 0.25 ], and a wake up
period  C = 1 min. We allow the agent to place only buy orders
between 10:30 and 11:00, and we set g equal to the mean daily
Figure 8: Comparison of a generated time-series with (or-
ange) and without (blue) a0.25-POV execution agent, placing
order from 10:30 AM to 11:00 AM.
volume. Thus, the POV agent will trade around 30 times, and it will
stop after 11:00 or when it reaches g transacted shares.
Figure 7 shows the impact of POV orders on the stock price, in
our CGAN-based framework (right) and in a classic market replay
(left) [ 3] at varying _. The plots show the normalized mid-price
di￿erence, between the simulations with and without POV agent.
The thick blue line represents the median mid-price di￿erence,
while the blue shaded regions indicate the 50% and 90% quantiles.
Results are averaged over 50 runs. It is interesting to notice the
substantial deviation of the mid-price during and subsequent to the
POV agent activity (from 10:30) with the CGAN-based approach
w.r.t. the market replay. In the market replay scenario, the small
deviations are due to new orders in the historical order book being
replayed, and rapidly vanish. We conclude that our framework can
adapt and react to new orders, showing new unobserved behavior.
We believe that this is the ￿rst step towards reactive IABS [ 3],
without the explicit need of hand-crafted pools of experimental
agents.
Figure 8 shows the mid-price traces resulting from a single mar-
ket impact experiment. The orange and blue lines are the synthetic
data generated by our framework with and without a 0.25-POV
agent, respectively. It is interesting to notice that in the scenario
with the POV agent, the mid-price exhibits a substantial deviation
w.r.t. the mid-price in the scenario without the POV agent, also
showing a common mean reversion trend to its average levels.
5.3 Realism through Stylized Facts
Finally, to assess the realism of generated simulations, we train
and compare our framework against TSLA historical data, and two
state of the art IABS con￿gurations proposed in the work [ 30]. The
￿rst IABS con￿guration includes 5000 noise and 100 value agents;
whereas the second con￿guration comprises 5000 noise, 100 value,
1 market maker, and 25 momentum agents. Both the con￿gurations
use historical data to compute the fundamental value of the traded
stock. 1
1We refer to the work in [ 30] for further details on the con￿gurations and description
of the agent strategies.

ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Cole￿a et al.
Figure 9: Market Stylized facts (TSLA) - historical data
against simulations.
Figure 9 shows the comparison between the three simulation
approaches and historical data, in terms of stylized facts (see section
3). The upper left chart shows the one-minute log-returns distribu-
tions. Almost all the simulations show the aggregation normality
property, but CGAN-based framework (green) is the most similar to
historical data. The upper right chart shows the volatility clustering,
as a function of time lag. Also here the CGAN-based framework
(green) is the most similar to historical data, showing a slight decay
in the correlation as time lag increases. The Volume/volatility corre-
lation is instead shown in the bottom left chart, in which both the
simulations fall short to capture the historical trend. However, the
CGAN framework shows the most promising performance, with a
similar trend to the historical data, but shifted to the left. Finally,
the bottom right chart shows the absence of auto-correlation in
which almost all the simulations capture the historical trend, but
our framework is still the closest to the real data.
In summary, our CGAN-based framework outperforms the state-
of-art con￿gurations, with more realistic stylized facts, close to
historical data.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we provided a novel framework for synthetic market
order generation in agent-based simulations. The purpose of our
framework is to provide realistic market scenarios to be used for
testing trading strategies, while still ensuring a reactive behavior
to the activity of the experimental agents. Our framework learns
the market behavior from historical data-sets, and models all the
market participants as a whole, that is a single agent reproducing
the entire market behavior and allowing realistic and reactive sim-
ulations. In particular, we propose a CGAN to generate synthetic
market orders as a function of the current market state. Integrated
in a simulator, our CGAN-based "world" agent can generate mean-
ingful orders in response to an experimental agent. By means of
extensive simulations we show that our framework outperforms
previous IABS approaches based on hand-crafted market con￿g-
urations, showing better market realism. We also show that our
approach ensures a responsive behavior of the simulated market to
the activity of experimental agents.
DISCLAIMER
This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the Arti-
￿cial Intelligence Research group of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and
its a￿liates (“JP Morgan”), and is not a product of the Research
Department of JP Morgan. JP Morgan makes no representation and
warranty whatsoever and disclaims all liability, for the complete-
ness, accuracy or reliability of the information contained herein.
This document is not intended as investment research or investment
advice, or a recommendation, o￿er or solicitation for the purchase
or sale of any security, ￿nancial instrument, ￿nancial product or
service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of par-
ticipating in any transaction, and shall not constitute a solicitation
under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such solicitation under
such jurisdiction or to such person would be unlawful.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded in part by JPMorgan Chase Co.
REFERENCES
[1] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. 2017. Wasserstein GAN.
arXiv:1701.07875 [stat.ML]
[2] Samuel Assefa. 2020. Generating synthetic data in ￿nance: opportunities, chal-
lenges and pitfalls. Challenges and Pitfalls (June 23, 2020) (2020).
[3] Tucker Hybinette Balch, Mahmoud Mahfouz, Joshua Lockhart, Maria Hybinette,
and David Byrd. 2019. How to Evaluate Trading Strategies: Single Agent Market
Replay or Multiple Agent Interactive Simulation? arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.12010
(2019).
[4] Daniel Borrajo, Manuela Veloso, and Sameena Shah. 2020. Simulating and clas-
sifying behavior in adversarial environments based on action-state traces: An
application to money laundering. In ACM International Conference on AI in Fi-
nance (ICAIF-2020).
[5] Hans Buehler, Lukas Gonon, Josef Teichmann, and Ben Wood. 2019. Deep hedging.
Quantitative Finance 19, 8 (2019), 1271–1291.
[6] David Byrd. 2019. Explaining agent-based ￿nancial market simulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.11650 (2019).
[7] David Byrd, Maria Hybinette, and Tucker Hybinette Balch. 2020. ABIDES: To-
wards High-Fidelity Multi-Agent Market Simulation. In Proceedings of the 2020
ACM SIGSIM Conference on Principles of Advanced Discrete Simulation. 11–22.
[8] Anirban Chakraborti, Ioane Muni Toke, Marco Patriarca, and Frédéric Abergel.
2011. Econophysics review: I. Empirical facts. Quantitative Finance 11, 7 (2011),
991–1012.
[9] Rama Cont. 2001. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statisti-
cal issues. Quantitative ￿nance 1, 2 (2001), 223.
[10] Dmitry E￿mov, Di Xu, Luyang Kong, Alexey Nefedov, and Archana Anandakrish-
nan. 2020. Using generative adversarial networks to synthesize arti￿cial ￿nancial
datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02271 (2020).
[11] J Doyne Farmer, Paolo Patelli, and Ilija I Zovko. 2005. The predictive power of
zero intelligence in ￿nancial markets. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 102, 6 (2005), 2254–2259.
[12] Dhananjay K Gode and Shyam Sunder. 1993. Allocative e￿ciency of markets with
zero-intelligence traders: Market as a partial substitute for individual rationality.
Journal of political economy 101, 1 (1993), 119–137.
[13] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative Adversarial
Nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 27.
[14] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and
Aaron Courville. 2017. Improved training of wasserstein gans. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.00028 (2017).
[15] David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2018. World models. arXiv:1803.10122 [cs.LG]
[16] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural
computation 9, 8 (1997), 1735–1780.
[17] Michaël Karpe, Jin Fang, Zhongyao Ma, and Chen Wang. [n.d.]. Multi-agent
reinforcement learning in a realistic limit order book market simulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.05574 ([n. d.]).

Towards Realistic Market Simulations: a Generative Adversarial Networks Approach ICAIF’21, November 3–5, 2021, Virtual Event, USA
[18] Junyi Li, Xintong Wang, Yaoyang Lin, Arunesh Sinha, and Michael Wellman.
2020. Generating realistic stock market order streams. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Arti￿cial Intelligence, Vol. 34. 727–734.
[19] Mario Lucic, Karol Kurach, Marcin Michalski, Sylvain Gelly, and Olivier Bousquet.
2018. Are GANs Created Equal? A Large-Scale Study. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Vol. 31.
[20] CM Macal and MJ North. 2010. Tutorial on agent-based modelling and simulation.
Journal of Simulation 4, 3 (2010), 151–162.
[21] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. 2014. Conditional Generative Adversarial
Nets. arXiv:1411.1784 [cs.LG]
[22] NVIDIA. [n.d.]. GPU NVIDIA TESLA V100. https://www.nvidia.com/it-it/data-
center/tesla-v100/
[23] Imon Palit, Steve Phelps, and Wing Lon Ng. 2012. Can a zero-intelligence plus
model explain the stylized facts of ￿nancial time series data?. In Proceedings of
the 11th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems-
Volume 2. 653–660.
[24] James Paulin, Anisoara Calinescu, and Michael Wooldridge. 2018. Agent-based
modeling for complex ￿nancial systems. IEEE Intelligent Systems 33, 2 (2018),
74–82.
[25] Remi M Sakia. 1992. The Box-Cox transformation technique: a review. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician) 41, 2 (1992), 169–178.
[26] Thomas Spooner, John Fearnley, Rahul Savani, and Andreas Koukorinis. 2018.
Market Making via Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems. 434–442.
[27] Shuntaro Takahashi, Yu Chen, and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. 2019. Modeling￿nancial
time-series with generative adversarial networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications 527 (2019), 121261.
[28] Germany. The E￿cient Reconstructor at Humboldt Universität zu Berlin. [n.d.].
LOBSTER: Limit Order Book System. https://lobsterdata.com/
[29] C Villani. 2008. Optimal transport, old and new. Notes for the 2005 Saint-Flour
summer school. Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental
Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer (2008).
[30] Svitlana Vyetrenko, David Byrd, Nick Petosa, Mahmoud Mahfouz, Danial Der-
vovic, Manuela Veloso, and Tucker Hybinette Balch. 2020. Get Real: Realism
Metrics for Robust Limit Order Book Market Simulations. In ACM International
Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF-2020).
[31] Xintong Wang and Michael P Wellman. 2020. Market Manipulation: An Adver-
sarial Learning Framework for Detection and Evasion. In 29th International Joint
Conference on Arti￿cial Intelligence.
[32] Haoran Wei, Yuanbo Wang, Lidia Mangu, and Keith Decker. 2019. Model-based
Reinforcement Learning for Predictions and Control for Limit Order Books.
arXiv:1910.03743 [cs.AI]
[33] Isao Yagi, Mahiro Hoshino, and Takanobu Mizuta. 2020. Analysis of the impact
of maker-taker fees on the stock market using agent-based simulation. In ACM
International Conference on AI in Finance (ICAIF-2020).
[34] Jinsung Yoon, Daniel Jarrett, and Mihaela van der Schaar. 2019. Time-series
Generative Adversarial Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d 'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
R. Garnett (Eds.), Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
