MANUSCRIPT
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based
stock market model
Ba`rbara Llacay 1,2 • Gilbert Peffer 1,2
Published online: 29 August 2017
/C211 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2017
Abstract The use of agent-based models (ABMs) has increased in the last years to
simulate social systems and, in particular, ﬁnancial markets. ABMs of ﬁnancial
markets are usually validated by checking the ability of the model to reproduce a set
of empirical stylised facts. However, other common-sense evidence is available
which is often not taken into account, ending with models which are valid but not
sensible. In this paper we present an ABM of a stock market which incorporates this
type of common-sense evidence and implements realistic trading strategies based on
practitioners literature. We next validate the model using a comprehensive approach
consisting of four steps: assessment of face validity, sensitivity analysis, calibration
and validation of model outputs.
Keywords Agent-based simulation /C1 Validation /C1 Calibration /C1 Stylised
facts /C1 Technical trading
JEL Classiﬁcation C63 /C1 G1 /C1 G20 /C1 G11
& Ba`rbara Llacay
llacay@cimne.upc.edu
1 Centre Internacional de Me`todes Nume`rics en Enginyeria (CIMNE), Campus Nord UPC, Gran
Capita`, s/n, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
2 Department for Economic, Financial, and Actuarial Mathematics, Faculty of Economics and
Business, University of Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 690, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
123
Comput Math Organ Theory (2018) 24:308–350
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10588-017-9258-0

1 Introduction
1.1 Background
In recent times, an increasing effort has been devoted to building agent-based
models (ABMs) of social systems and, in particular, of ﬁnancial markets, as ABM is
a ﬂexible paradigm to study the individual and social behaviour of agents and its
effect on the dynamics of the system. Many models of the stock market have been
developed that focus on a broad range of market mechanisms and price dynamics
(LeBaron 2006; Hommes 2006; Chakraborti et al. 2011). A usual way to validate
these models is the analysis of their ability to replicate some of the statistical
stylised facts identiﬁed in ﬁnancial markets (Janssen and Ostrom 2006), such as the
lack of return autocorrelation or the clustering of volatility.
However, other information about ﬁnancial markets is available, such as the level
of market volatility or the volumes moved by different types of agents, which can be
used in the validation of an ABM but is often neglected in favour of the stylised
facts. Even ‘ ‘common sense’ ’ evidence should be taken into account if possible
without ignoring it only to achieve a more parsimonious model (Edmonds and Moss
2005). For this reason, we advocate in this article that it is also necessary to look at
other basic empirical data, such as the volume moved by ﬁnancial traders or their
performance, to assess the validity of a model. If we only focus on the stylised facts
reproduced by the model, we run the risk of having a model which is valid but not
sensible.
It is precisely the problem we encountered when re-implementing a previous
ﬁnancial market model as a starting point of our research. We chose the model
developed by Farmer and Joshi ( 2002)—henceforth, the ‘FJ model’—because it is
simple, a thorough analysis is provided by its authors, and it is able to reproduce a
variety of empirical stylised facts. So, it is a valid model according to the usual
criteria. However, when we looked at other model outputs, such as the performance
of the different strategies, we found out that one of the trading strategies—the trend-
following one—was systematically losing money. This situation would not make
any sense in real markets, as a loss-making strategy would soon fall out of favour
and ceased to be used. For this reason, we decided to enhance the model by re-
designing the trend-following strategy. To this aim, we turned to the practitioners
literature and implemented a realistic strategy based on a technical strategy widely
used in real markets.
The model we present here makes a threefold contribution to the agent-based
modelling literature: (1) we present the results of a model-to-model exercise where
we have re-implemented the FJ model; (2) after reasoning that the results obtained
from the FJ model do not satisfy certain common sense properties, we provide an
enhanced model with a realistic technical trading strategy that builds on the
practitioners literature; (3) we apply a four-step validation process to the new model
which allows us to assess its validity in a more complete way than what is available
in the related literature.
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 309
123

1.2 Empirical validation of agent-based models
Despite the potential of agent-based modelling, it has not been adopted yet as a
mainstream tool by orthodox economists. One possible explanation draws on the
lack of methodology standards in agent-based modelling, and an important aspect
here is the diversity in calibration and validation procedures used by agent-based
modellers (Fagiolo et al. 2007). The process of validation assesses how accurately a
model or simulation represents the real world system in light of its objectives.
Validation is preceded by the process of calibration, where model parameters are
determined building on real world data. Calibration and validation are currently one
of the most important challenges in agent-based modelling (Ngo and See 2012;
Bianchi et al. 2007).
Beyond the difﬁculty of validation in general modelling and simulation
(available resources are surveyed for example in Balci ( 1995) or Sargent ( 1998)),
calibration and validation of ABMs are specially challenging due to the inherent
complexity of this type of models, where non-linearities, heterogeneity, stochastic
dynamics, non-trivial interaction among agents and micro–macro feedback loops
are usually present (Fagiolo et al. 2006). This has led to intensive discussions on
how to validate ABMs, as a result of which a variety of validation levels have been
distinguished (Carley 1996; Bianchi et al. 2007) and different validation method-
ologies have been proposed (Fagiolo et al. 2007; Moss 2008) (specially remarkable
here are the three empirical calibration and validation procedures surveyed by
Windrum et al. ( 2007): the indirect calibration approach (Dosi et al. 2006), the
Werker–Brenner approach (Werker and Brenner 2004) and the history-friendly
approach (Malerba et al. 1999)).
When reviewing the literature on model validation, the reader comes across a
diversity of validation types—such as internal, external, conceptual or cross-model
validation (Carley 1996), which can be subsumed under the overall classiﬁcation
provided by Zeigler ( 1985):
• Replicative validity The model outputs are compared to data already acquired
from the real system.
• Predictive validity The model is able to reproduce system behaviour before it is
observed in the real system.
• Structural validity The model ‘ ‘not only reproduces the observed real system
behaviour, but truly reﬂects the way in which the real system operates to
produce this behaviour’ ’ (Zeigler 1985, p. 5).
One advantage of agent-based modelling is that it has the potential to replicate
the microstructure and mechanisms that give rise to social phenomena under study
and thus ABMs can be structurally validated—which is the highest type of validity
according to Zeigler.
Following Klu¨ gl ( 2008), structural validation can be decomposed in the
following processes:
• Face validation studies if initial model outcomes are plausible.
310 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

• Sensitivity analysis studies the effect of the model parameters on results. When
implementing a large model, this allows to identify the crucial parameters.
• Calibration identiﬁes for which parameter values the model presents a better ﬁt
with real world.
• Output validation studies whether model outputs match real-world data, usually
through graphical or statistical comparison.
These processes are seldom wholly implemented in agent-based modelling (Ngo
and See 2012)—a fact that we will conﬁrm in the next subsection in the particular
case of ABM of ﬁnancial markets. This paper makes a contribution to the ABM
literature presenting a model of an artiﬁcial stock market fully validated by
following these four steps to assess its structural validity. Our emphasis on the
realistic modelling of agent strategies increases the structural validity of the model
and moreover responds to the calls made by some researchers to adequately capture
both the macro-level patterns and the micro-level behaviours and relationships
(Gilbert 2004)—this two-level validation is what Moss and Edmonds call cross-
validation (Moss and Edmonds 2005).
1.3 Agent-based models of fundamentalist 1 technical traders
In stock markets, two main investment approaches can be identiﬁed (Bonenkamp
2010):
• Fundamentalist trading Fundamentalist investors argue that assets have an
intrinsic value, which can be determined with a detailed analysis of the
characteristics of the asset, its issuer and the market (Murphy 1999). The price is
expected to move around the fundamental value, so when both diverge an
investment opportunity appears: if the value exceeds the price the asset is said to
be overvalued and it should be bought; if the value is lower than the price, then it
should be sold (Malkiel 1973).
• Technical analysis This approach builds on the analysis of past price movements
to infere its future evolution. It claims that markets are driven by psychological
factors—which reﬂect investors’ hopes and fears—rather than fundamentals
(O’Neill 2011). Technical analysis is much more recent than fundamentalist
trading; its use largely spread since the 1960s and it has come to dominate the
most modern and liquid markets (Johnson et al. 2003).
Given that the main trading approaches in real markets are the fundamentalist
and technical strategies, it makes sense to combine these two approaches when
building a model of a ﬁnancial market, to better resemble the behaviour of real
investors (Menkhoff 2010; Moss and Edmonds 2005). Many authors in the
agent-based arena have also used stylised versions of the fundamentalist and the
technical strategies to build models which are able to reproduce different
statistical properties observed in real markets. For example, Farmer and Joshi
(2002) study the role that these strategies have in market dynamics, LiCalzi and
Pellizzari ( 2006) focus on the fundamentalist strategy, Wei et al. ( 2013) analyse
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 311
123

the effect of momentum traders, and Raberto et al. ( 2003) use the Genoa
Artiﬁcial Stock Market to study the proﬁts made by these two main strategies.
Some articles add features from the behavioural ﬁnance ﬁeld to enrich the
behaviour of agents: for example, the model by Pascual et al. ( 2006) includes
psychological traders which are based on the research by Kahneman and Tversky
(1979), and Shimokawa et al. ( 2007) also build on the work by Kahneman and
Tversky and study the effect of risk aversion. Other models focus on the impact
of learning algorithms: the traders in the Santa Fe Stock Market (Arthur et al.
1996; LeBaron et al. 1999) use a genetic algorithm to update their price
prediction rules, and Martı ´nez-Jaramillo and Tsang ( 2009) also explore different
procedures to update the decision rules of artiﬁcial traders. Finally, a number of
articles focus on the effect of imitation mechanisms, allowing the agents to
improve their strategies by looking at other agents, or adopting the main strategy
in the market (LeBaron and Yamamoto 2007; Alfarano et al. 2005; Lux and
Marchesi 1999; Westerhoff 2010).
Also building on these two trading approaches, we implement a model with two
types of investors: fundamentalist traders (FUND) and technical traders (TREND).
Our model makes a contribution to the previous literature in two aspects: (1)
implementation of realistic trading strategies based on practitioners literature, and
(2) complete assessment of the model structural validity. Building on the FJ model
mentioned above (Farmer and Joshi 2002), we will modify the technical strategy to
avoid certain features that run counter to common sense evidence, and for that aim
we will turn to the practical trading literature to implement a sound, realistic
strategy for technical investors. Next, we will assess the validity of the model
following the four-step procedure proposed by Klu ¨ gl ( 2008).
The ﬁnancial market models reviewed above are cross-validated (Moss and
Edmonds 2005), as they all compare the statistical properties of the simulated time
series with the stylised facts observed in r eal markets—so a macr o-level validation
is applied—and the agent strategies inspire on the most popular trading
approaches in real world—so the micro level is informed by the behaviour of
real traders. This two-level validation is an improvement on the models one can
ﬁnd in other ﬁelds. However, if we turn to the four-step validation procedure
proposed by Klu ¨ gl ( 2008), we realise that some processes are usually missing.
Table 1 summarises which validation steps are addressed in the models reviewed
above, and it becomes clear that although the outputs are always validated, no
sensitivity analysis is usually undertak en, and calibration is also a weak point of
some models. In contrast to this, we ha ve applied the complete validation
procedure to our model, as described later.
In Sect. 2 we present our ABM and describe how we have implemented both
trading strategies, founding on empirical usual practice. In Sect. 3 we describe the
validation procedure, consisting of four steps: assessment of face validity,
sensitivity analysis, calibration and output validation. Section 4 then concludes
our discussion.
312 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

2 Model description
2.1 Starting point: reimplementation of FJ model
One methodological issue in agent-based modelling is the high diversity in model
objectives, structure and theoretical context that hinders the comparison between
developed models (Fagiolo et al. 2006). For this reason, the comparison of models
has been advocated as a way to increase the credibility and the validity of a model
(North and Macal 2007).
Following the model-to-model approach (Hales et al. 2003), we decided to build
on a previous ﬁnancial market model instead of developing yet another model from
scratch. This incremental procedure is in line with the Take A Previous model and
Add Something (TAPAS) approach, which improves the validity of new models by
building on existing, tested, well-understood and accepted models (Frenken 2005).
In particular, we chose the FJ model as it is simple but able to reproduce different
empirical stylised facts, a good description is available and a deep analysis is
provided by its authors.
Due to space limitations, we do not include here any detailed description of the
FJ model, but only a brief summary. For further details, we refer the reader to the
original paper.
Two types of traders are considered:
Table 1 Validation steps used in agent-based models of fundamentalist ? technical traders, following
Klu¨ gl ( 2008)
Model Face
validation
Sensitivity
analysis
Calibration Output
validation
Alfarano et al. ( 2005) sd d
Arthur et al. ( 1996) ss d
Farmer and Joshi ( 2002) ds d
LeBaron et al. ( 1999) ss s d
LeBaron and Yamamoto ( 2007) d
LiCalzi and Pellizzari ( 2006) sd
Lux and Marchesi ( 1999) sd
Martı´nez-Jaramillo and Tsang
(2009)
ss s d
Pascual et al. ( 2006) d
Raberto et al. ( 2003) ss d
Shimokawa et al. ( 2007) sd
Wei et al. ( 2013) sd d
Westerhoff ( 2010) ss d
A dark circle indicates that the step is fully satisﬁed; a blank circle indicates that the step is partially
addressed; no circle indicates that the validation step is not addressed at all
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 313
123

• Value investors , who take positions proportional to the difference between the
price and their perception of the fundamental value, in the belief that the price
will tend to the value.
• Trend-following investors , who take positions proportional to the difference
between the current and a past price, in the belief that prices move in trends.
Both types of agents use thresholds to enter and exit a position, what can be
understood as a way to reduce the trading frequency motivated by excessive
transaction costs. The net order submitted by all traders is ﬁlled by a market maker
that sets the new price.
The model exhibits face validity, as the time series of simulated prices show a
qualitative correspondence to the real series of prices. The statistical analysis of
results reveals that the model replicates different empirical stylised facts—fat tails
of log-return distribution, volume skewness, strong autocorrelation of volume and
volatility—so outputs are validated.
In our reimplementation of the FJ model we not only looked at the results
reported in the paper by Farmer and Joshi—Fig. 1 reproduces the statistical analyses
displayed in the FJ paper using our own data to assess the correctness of the
reimplementation exercise—but took a deep exploration of other variables and
features, such as agent orders, positions or performance. Figure 2 provides a
Fig. 1 Illustration of statistical facts obtained in the replication of the FJ model, using the same type of
plots than displayed in the paper by Farmer and Joshi for better comparability. Upper left Q–Q plot of
return distribution. Upper right histogram of volume distribution. Lower left autocorrelation function of
volume. Lower right autocorrelation function of volatility as absolute returns
314 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

summary of market dynamics, and brings to light a particular fact that attracted our
attention: trend traders get negative proﬁts. This is a recurring feature, robust under
different parameter conﬁgurations. This situation is clearly not realistic, as a
systematically loss-making strategy would soon disappear from real markets.
This type of stylised fact is perhaps so blatantly obvious that one may fail to even
take it into account. With the present paper we want to point at the need to
incorporate this type of common-sense evidence into agent-based models. With this
aim in mind, we decided to enhance the FJ model by implementing a realistic
technical strategy that is competitive against the fundamentalist strategy while
keeping the many virtues of the FJ model. We describe next the several model
components, where the price formation process and the fundamentalist strategy
build on the FJ paper, and the technical strategy builds on the practitioners
literature.
2.2 Model description
We consider a market for multiple assets—stocks—in unrestricted supply, where
traders—who have no cash nor short-selling constraints—place orders at discrete
Fig. 2 Illustration of market dynamics obtained in the replication of the FJ model
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 315
123

trading intervals, changing the composition of their investment portfolios in
accordance with their respective valuation model. At each time step, all the agents
trade in random order, and a new price is set based on the aggregated order
submitted by traders. 1
2.2.1 Price formation
The price Pt for the stock is set by a market maker in accordance to a linear price
formation rule. Although other formulations are possible (see e.g. Madhavan ( 2000)
for a survey), we use the simplest one, which states that prices have to rise (fall) in
the presence of over-demand (over-supply) by an amount that is inversely
proportional to the liquidity of the traded security. Here, we do not take into
account the inventory of the market maker nor the presence of information
asymmetries in the market, and thus assume bid-ask spreads to be zero. Stock price
is updated according to:
Pt ¼ Pt/C0 1 þ 1
k /C1 Ht/C0 1 þ nt; ð1Þ
where Ht-1 is the total excess order, that is the sum of all orders emitted in t - 1, k
is a constant liquidity factor that accounts for the depth of the market, nt is a random
term, nt /C24 Nð0; rPÞ, that accounts for the random perturbations—such as the arrival
of new information—that can possibly affect the market-maker’s decision making
process.
One disadvantage of this linear formulation is that prices can become negative,
which could be avoided by using a log-price formulation for the price discovery
rule. Outstanding orders in any given trading interval are always ﬁlled at the quoted
prices and the market maker absorbs the excess or covers the shortfall, adjusting the
prices according to the impact function (Eq. 1).
2.2.2 Fundamentalist traders (FUND)
Our implementation of the fundamentalist strategy is based on the FJ model.
Fundamentalist investors derive the intrinsic value of the stock from a private,
exogenous signal they receive before each trading period. This exogenous signal is
modelled as a random walk Vt, plus an agent-speciﬁc constant vf that accounts for
the variability in the perception of the fundamental value:
Vf
t ¼ Vt þ vf ; where Vt ¼ Vt/C0 1 þ gt; ð2Þ
where gt is drawn from a normal distribution with constant variance, gt /C24 N 0; rVðÞ ,
and the agent-speciﬁc constant vf is set at the start of the simulation from a uniform
distribution, vf /C24 Uðvmin; vmaxÞ, with vmin =- vmax.
The positions of fundamentalist traders are proportional to the difference of
actual price Pt to perceived fundamental value Vf
t . However, an agent only enters a
1 Code is available at https://libraries.io/github/gitwitcho/var-agent-model. Our code is implemented in
Java and uses the scheduler from Repast simphony ( https://repast.github.io/repast_simphony.html).
316 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

position when the difference between price and value is above a given threshold,
jVf
t /C0 Ptj [ Tf . In that case, the position is determined as:
posf
t ¼ Vf
t /C0 Pt: ð3Þ
Let’s note that when the price lies above the fundamental value, the asset is
overpriced and the agent decides to sell; when the price lies below the fundamental
value, then the agent decides to buy.
Fundamentalist investors keep their positions open until the price and the
fundamental value converge, that is, until their difference is smaller than a given
threshold. In that case, the agents liquidate their position:
If posf
t/C0 1 [ 0 & Vf
t /C0 Pf
t \sf then posf
t ¼ 0:
If posf
t/C0 1\0 & Vf
t /C0 Pf
t [ /C0 sf then posf
t ¼ 0:
ð4Þ
In case an agent has an open position, but the liquidation condition is not
satisﬁed, then it simply updates its position based on the difference between price
and value: if this difference has reduced (widened) since the position was opened,
then the investor also reduces (increments) its position:
posf
t ¼ Vf
t /C0 Pt: ð5Þ
Fundamentalist investors are heterogeneous in their entry and exit thresholds:
Tf /C24 UðTmin; TmaxÞ; sf /C24 Uðsmin; smaxÞ
Once determined the new position, the agent calculates the order to be sent to the
market-maker:
hf
t ¼ posf
t /C0 posf
t/C0 1: ð6Þ
Figure 3 summarises how the fundamentalist strategy works.
2.2.3 Technical traders (TREND)
Technical traders exploit price trends, and for that aim we have implemented two of
the most common techniques in real markets (Taylor 2005): to detect the start of a
trend in prices, agents compare a short- and a long-term moving average of past
prices; to detect the end of a price trend, agents rely on the technique of channel
breakouts. To implement these rules, we have built on the practitioner literature,
mainly on the description provided in Kestner ( 2003).
At each time step, technical investors calculate two simple moving averages
(MA) of past prices: one short-term MA that responds quickly to recent price
movements, and a long-term MA that responds more slowly. Let wtr
S and wtr
L be the
windows used by the technical agent tr to calculate his short- and long-term moving
averages, respectively. The moving averages are then given by:
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 317
123

MAðwtr
S Þt ¼ 1
wtr
S
/C1
Xt
i¼t/C0 wtr
S þ1
Pi:
MAðwtr
L Þt ¼ 1
wtr
L
/C1
Xt
i¼t/C0 wtr
L þ1
Pi:
ð7Þ
When the two moving averages cross, it is the key time to buy or sell: if the short-
term MA crosses the long-term MA from below, the agent interprets it as the
beginning of an upward trend and opens a long position; if the short-term MA
crosses the long-term MA from above, the agent interprets it as the start of a
downward trend and opens a short position (Fig. 4).
When the MA’s cross and the agent opens a position, it is proportional to the
difference in slope between the two moving averages, because it is assumed that the
greater this difference, the steeper the upward or downward price trend.
Equations ( 8) and ( 9) specify the formula used by technical investors to calculate
their position:
• If MA(wtr
S )t crosses MA(wtr
L )t from below, then the agent opens a long position:
postr
t ¼ 25 /C1 Dincltr
t
/C12/C12 /C12/C12 ð8Þ
• If MA(wtr
S )t crosses MA(wtr
L )t from above, then the agent opens a short position:
postr
t ¼/C0 25 /C1 Dincltr
t
/C12/C12 /C12/C12 ; ð9Þ
Fig. 3 State diagram of the fundamentalist strategy
318 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

where
• 25 is a normalisation factor aimed at having the same order of magnitude in the
orders from fundamentalist and technical agents. 2
• Dincltr
t is the difference between the slope of the two MA’s:
Dincltr
t ¼ arctan MAðwtr
S Þt /C0 MAðwtr
S Þt/C0 1
/C0/C1
/C0 arctan MAðwtr
L Þt /C0 MAðwtr
L Þt/C0 1
/C0/C1
Technical investors keep their positions open until they think that the price trend has
begun to reverse. In order to detect a trend reversal, the agents use a channel breakout
rule: if the current price is the lowest in the last wtr
C days, then the technical trader
interprets that the price is going down, and any long position should be liquidated; if
the current price is the highest in the last wtr
C days, then the technical trader interprets
that the price is going up, and any short position should be liquidated.
Fig. 4 Illustration of the behaviour of long- and short-term moving averages along time
2 As the fundamentalist and technical agents use quite different indicators for their positions—one based
on the difference between price and fundamental value, and the other one based on the difference of slope
between moving averages—the model runs the risk of having one group of traders moving far major
volumes and biasing the market dynamics. To give fundamentalist and technical agents the a priori
opportunity to impact prices in a balanced way, we have added this normalisation factor. To calculate it,
we have repeatedly run the model and calculated the ratio of average maximum fundamentalist and
technical positions obtained after each run. The normalisation factor has been selected as the value for
which the ratio of maximum fundamentalist/technical positions lies around 1, as this indicates that
fundamentalist and technical positions take similar values and so both groups of traders have a priori a
similar impact in price formation.
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 319
123

If postr
t/C0 1 [ 0 & Pt ¼ Min
j2½t/C0 wtr
C þ1; t/C138
Pj
/C8/C9
then postr
t ¼ 0:
If postr
t/C0 1\0 & Pt ¼ Max
j2½t/C0 wtr
C þ1; t/C138
Pj
/C8/C9
then postr
t ¼ 0: ð10Þ
Note that when drawing the minimum and the maximum of the price over a period,
a channel appears, which is why the method is called ‘ ‘channel breakout’ ’ (Fig.5).
As happens with the fundamentalist investors, when a technical agent has an
open position, but the channel breakout condition is not satisﬁed, then he simply
updates his position keeping the same sign:
If postr
t/C0 1 [ 0 then postr
t ¼ 25 /C1 Dincltr
t
/C12/C12 /C12/C12
If postr
t/C0 1\0 then postr
t ¼/C0 25 /C1 Dincltr
t
/C12/C12 /C12/C12 : ð11Þ
Technical investors are heterogeneous in the windows of the moving averages
and breakout channel:
wtr
S /C24 Uðwtr
S;min; wtr
S;maxÞ; wtr
L /C24 Uðwtr
L;min; wtr
L;maxÞ; wtr
C /C24 Uðwtr
C;min; wtr
C;maxÞ:
Once set the new position, the agent calculates the order to be sent to the market-
maker:
htr
t ¼ postr
t /C0 postr
t/C0 1: ð12Þ
Figure 6 summarises how the technical strategy works:
Fig. 5 Illustration of the behaviour of the channel used as exit condition
320 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

3 Description of model validation
We describe next the validation procedure used to assess the validity of the model
described in Sect. 2. Although the four steps are presented in a linear way, it is
rather an iterative process, with movements back and forth between the different
steps. For example, a temptative calibration can be done before conducting the
sensitivity analysis, or calibration is often undertaken with the aim of replicating the
stylised facts used later in the validation of outcomes.
In all the graphics shown throughout this section, we have used the parameter
values listed in Table 2, unless otherwise indicated. All simulations have a duration
of 2000 time steps (we assume that each time step is equivalent to 1 day, and so
each run has an equivalent duration of 8 years). Average results shown next are
based on 200 runs with different seeds for random processes.
3.1 Face validation
In this section we will look at different variables to understand how the model works
and which types of results are produced.
3.1.1 Price and fundamental value
The price moves around the fundamental value. While it may be that the price and
fundamental value do not cross for a long time period, they end up converging due
to the action of traders (Fig. 7). The action of fundamentalist investors prevents the
price from going too far away from the fundamental value, since when the price
falls below the value, fundamentalist agents buy and push the price up, and vice
Fig. 6 State diagram of the technical strategy
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 321
123

versa. Technical investors propel the trends in price: when the price begins to
increase, they buy and strengthen the price rise (analogously when the price begins
to drop). The joint action of fundamentalist and technical investors cause the price
trends to be temporary, and the price always ends up moving around the
fundamental value. Therefore, the price has a stable dynamic and shows no bubbles
nor crashes.
Fig. 7 Average of price and fundamental value over 200 runs
Table 2 Table of parameters used in the simulations
Parameter Value Parameter description
Nticks 2000 Number of ticks of each run
k 400 Liquidity
P0 100 Initial price
rP 0.4 Standard deviation for random term in price formation
NFUND 200 Number of fundamentalist traders
NTREND 200 Number of technical traders
rV 0.25 Standard deviation for random term in fundamental value formation
[vmin, vmax][ -8, 8] Boundaries of the uniform distribution that sets the difference between the
fundamental value and the value perceived by each fundamentalist trader
[Tmin, Tmax] [2, 5] Boundaries of the uniform distribution that sets the entry thresholds of
fundamentalist traders
[smin, smax][ -0.5,
1]
Boundaries of the uniform distribution that sets the exit thresholds of
fundamentalist traders
[wtr
S;min, wtr
S;max] [5, 15] Boundaries of the uniform distribution that sets the window of short-term
moving average used by technical traders
[wtr
L;min, wtr
L;max] [35,
50]
Boundaries of the uniform distribution that sets the window of long-term
moving average used by technical traders
[wtr
C;min, wtr
C;max] [5, 30] Boundaries of the uniform distribution that sets the window of exit channel
used by technical traders
322 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Figure 8 shows the time series of annualised volatility, which does not show
important variations during the course of the simulation. Note that the level of volatility
is reasonably close to the empirical volatility observed in stock markets during calm
periods (for example, the average volatility of S&P500 during 2014 was 11%).
3.1.2 Orders from investors
By construction, the positions of fundamentalist and technical investors have the
same order of magnitude [precisely we have added a normalisation factor to the
expression of technical positions to prevent a group from having far superior
positions than the other group, see Eqs. 8 and 9].
Note that the aggregate positions of technical investors usually move in the
direction of prices—if the price rises, technical investors buy—whereas the aggregate
positions of fundamentalist investors tend to move in the opposite direction—if the
price rises and exceeds the fundamental value, fundamentalist investors sell (hence the
technical investors induce a positive autocorrelation in returns, and fundamentalist
investors induce a negative autocorrelation). This can be clearly seen when doing a
zoom in the graphic of price and aggregate positions of agents.
In Fig. 9 we can see that the positions of technical investors suffer higher
variations than those of fundamentalist investors, because when the trend in the
price reverts, technical investors liquidate their portfolio and pass from long to short
positions (or vice versa), while fundamentalist agents do not necessarily liquidate
their portfolio because the difference between the price and the fundamental value
does not need to change sign (Fig. 10). The fact that the positions of technical
traders suffer higher changes between two time steps translates into higher orders
(see Fig. 11), and so the impact of the technical group in price formation is more
noticeable. This is consistent with the volume patterns observed in real world:
although there is no data on which volume is moved by fundamentalist and
technical investors in real markets, there is indeed evidence that most mutual funds
behave as technical investors in short-term trades (Menkhoff 2010), and technical
strategies have a higher weight in stock price dynamics (Feng et al. 2012).
Fig. 8 Average volatility of returns over 200 runs
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 323
123

3.1.3 Investor performance
Both the fundamentalist and the technical group are able to make proﬁts (although
not all of the agents make proﬁts, the average performance is positive). This was
precisely one of the goals when designing our model: it does not make sense from
an empirical point of view to use strategies that are not proﬁtable, so we have not
used exactly the FJ model, but we have modiﬁed the technical strategy so that it is
more sophisticated and does not consistently lose money.
Because of their greater positions, technical investors have a bigger weight in
price dynamics. Being able to drive trends helps them make money, because
entering long (short) positions when the price starts to rise (decrease) is proﬁtable,
and moreover their own orders strengthen the price trend. However, fundamentalist
investors are also able to take advantage of these price dynamics, because when the
difference between price and fundamental value increases their positions become
also bigger, and they can earn more money when the price ﬁnally converges to the
value (Fig. 12).
3.2 Sensitivity analysis
To study the effect of parameters on model results, we have performed a sensitivity
analysis using the one-factor-at-a-time methodology (ten Broeke et al. 2016),
varying one parameter at a time to observe its impact on results. This has allowed us
to identify the parameters with a most important impact on model dynamics and
which will require a specially accurate calibration.
Fig. 9 Average positions of fundamentalist and technical investors over 200 runs
324 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Fig. 10 Zoom for t = 1500…1750 of the average of price and aggregate positions of fundamentalist and
technical investors over 200 runs
Fig. 11 Average orders from fundamentalist and technical investors for 200 runs
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 325
123

To give an idea of the sensitivity of results, we show below the behaviour of a
subset of model outputs under three different parameter values. The selected outputs
provide information on several aspects: time evolution of price versus fundamental
value, as an indicator of the overall market dynamics; proﬁts accumulated by
fundamentalist and technical traders, as an indicator of agent performance—this
indicator is specially relevant given that a new technical strategy has been
implemented with the aim of making it competitive; the autocorrelation function of
returns and volatility, to gain insight on when the model is able to replicate the lack
of return autocorrelation and the clustering of volatility—we have chosen these
particular stylised facts with an eye on the posterior phase of output validation
because they turn to be the most sensitive ones; and the boxplot of return excess
kurtosis and volatility (calculated as the standard deviation of log-returns, without
annualising the resulting value), as an indicator of market stability and return non-
normality.
We provide next a summary of the results of the sensitivity analysis for each
parameter:
• Parameters associated to price formation
– Liquidity is coupled to the number of agents (the more agents in the market,
the higher the liquidity), and when these parameters move in tandem no
signiﬁcant change is observed in market results.
– Standard deviation of noise term When rP increases, the price gets more
volatile as the random term added to the price formation process (see Eq. 1)
takes higher values. Figure 13 shows that this has a special impact on
FUNDs’ performance: as the price takes a wider range of values (Fig. 13a),
its difference with respect to the fundamental value rises, and in
consequence the fundamentalist positions also increase. The weight of
Fig. 12 Average proﬁts of fundamentalist and technical investors over 200 runs. Proﬁts obtained by
agent i are calculated as the beneﬁts accumulated since the start of the simulation due to changes in price:
Benit ¼ Benit/C0 1 þ posit/C0 1 /C1ð Pt /C0 Pt/C0 1Þ
326 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Fig. 13 Sensitivity of model outputs to parameter rP. a Average of price (in black) and fundamental
value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and technical (in green) traders. c Average
autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared returns. e Boxplot of return kurtosis.
f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated over 200 runs. (Color ﬁgure online)
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 327
123

fundamentalist agents in price formation gets higher, which results
advantageous to this type of traders and translates in better proﬁts (Fig. 13b).
• Parameters associated to fundamental value formation
– Standard deviation The model outputs are not much sensitive to the standard
deviation of the process of fundamental value formation, the parameter rV.
As shown in Fig. 14, an increase in rV has an obvious effect on the volatility
of the fundamental price process (in red in Fig. 14a). This leads fundamen-
talist traders to move a higher volume as the difference between price and
fundamental value increases, and this has a positive effect in their proﬁts.
The higher orders sent by fundamentalist agents rise the range of price
movements (volatility increases in Fig. 14f) but has a small effect in their
pattern, so the autocorrelation of returns and volatility barely change
(Fig. 14c, d).
• Parameters associated to the fundamentalist strategy
– Entry threshold simulation results are not much sensitive to the parameters
associated to the FUND strategy (entry threshold, exit threshold and the
offset that accounts for the variability in the agent perception of the
fundamental value). Among these three parameters, the entry threshold is the
one with a most signiﬁcant impact on outputs: when the entry threshold
increases, it is more difﬁcult for fundamentalist traders to enter a position, as
they need to wait for a bigger divergence between the price and the
perceived fundamental value. This reduces the volume of fundamentalist
orders and their proﬁts (Fig. 15b), but the effect in other model outputs is not
remarkable.
– Exit threshold when the exit threshold increases, it is easier for fundamen-
talist traders to close a position. However, their volume does not change too
much, because with a low exit threshold fundamentalist agents do not close
their positions that often, but reduce them gradually until the difference
between price and fundamental value is small enough and so in the end the
volume is similar in both cases. For this reason, the model results show a low
sensitivity to this parameter (Fig. 16).
– Value offset when the value offset rises, it gets easier for the fundamentalist
traders to open a position, because the difference between the price and their
perceived fundamental value is higher and so it is more likely to surpass the
entry threshold. For this reason, the volume moved by fundamentalist agents
tends to increase, but their net effect in price dynamics is not signiﬁcant
because of the symmetry in the range of values of the offset: as
fundamentalist traders have the same probability to have a positive or a
negative offset, they are approximately equally likely to enter long or short
positions and so the aggregated orders do not show a big variation when the
328 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Fig. 14 Sensitivity of model outputs to parameter rV. a Average of price (in black) and fundamental
value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and technical (in green) traders. c Average
autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared returns. e Boxplot of return kurtosis.
f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated over 200 runs. (Color ﬁgure online)
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 329
123

Fig. 15 Sensitivity of model outputs to FUND entry threshold [ Tmin, Tmax]. a Average of price (in black)
and fundamental value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and technical (in green)
traders. c Average autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared returns. e Boxplot of
return kurtosis. f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated over 200 runs. (Color
ﬁgure online)
330 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Fig. 16 Sensitivity of model outputs to FUND exit threshold [ smin, smax]. a Average of price (in black)
and fundamental value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and technical (in green)
traders. c Average autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared returns. e Boxplot of
return kurtosis. f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated over 200 runs. (Color
ﬁgure online)
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 331
123

offset goes up. As a result, the model outputs show a small sensitivity to this
parameter (Fig. 17).
• Parameters associated to the technical strategy
– Window of short -term moving average When the value of the short-term
moving average is low—specially, when it is close to 1,—then the price
shows a more volatile behaviour (Fig. 18a): when the short-term window is
small, the technical entry indicator (given by the difference in slopes of the
short- and the long-term moving averages of prices) becomes quite sensitive,
as any movement up or down in the price can induce a change in the slope of
the short-term moving average, and the joint action of technical traders can
cause a marked movement in the price. This notable effect in prices results in
higher proﬁts for technical traders (Fig. 18b), but fundamentalists also take
advantage of the situation because the higher divergence of price with
respect to fundamental value results in higher fundamentalist positions
which lead to more substantial proﬁts when the price reverts. When the
short-term window increases, it has a smoothing effect that prevents the
peaks in the price series (Fig. 18c, d) and so the kurtosis and volatility of
returns go down (Fig. 18e, f).
– Window of long -term moving average A variation in the window of the long-
term moving average has a less noticeable effect in the results than the short-
term window, as the smoothing effect obtained when increasing the window
is less signiﬁcant for larger values of this window (Fig. 19).
– Window of exit channel When the window of the exit channel increases,
technical traders are forced to keep their positions for longer. When they ﬁnally
are ‘allowed’ to close a position after keeping it open during a long period of
time, it is likely that the price trend which left them to enter their current positions
has reversed, and so technical traders liquidate their portfolios. If they do so more
or less simultaneously, they move the price and make higher proﬁts (Fig. 20b),
but increase the kurtosis and volatility of returns (Fig. 20e, f). The price
movements concentrated in short intervals of time also increase the autocor-
relation of returns (Fig. 20c) and the clustering of volatility (Fig. 20d).
• Proportion of fundamentalist/technical traders We could study the effect of the
total number of agents, but as said above it is insigniﬁcant as long as it increases
or decreases at the same time than the liquidity parameter. A more interesting
situation is obtained when the proportion of fundamentalist to technical agents is
altered. Figure 21 shows that when the market is dominated by technical traders
(that is, when the proportion of fundamentalist agents is 25%) the price exhibits
high jumps3: when there is an incipient trend in price series, the technical traders
3 The average price in Fig. 21a seems to oscillate, but this is only due to the averaging. In the price series
obtained from individual runs, there are jumps in the price process that look like oscillations in the
average price series.
332 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Fig. 17 Sensitivity of model outputs to FUND offset [ vmin, vmax]. a Average of price (in black) and
fundamental value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and technical (in green)
traders. c Average autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared returns. e Boxplot of
return kurtosis. f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated over 200 runs. (Color
ﬁgure online)
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 333
123

propel it until the distance from the fundamental value is high enough for the
minority of fundamentalist agents to be able to reverse it. This scenario directly
leads to higher return kurtosis and volatility (Fig. 21e, f), and also has an impact
334 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

on the proﬁts obtained by the agents (Fig. 21b): technical traders take advantage
of the momentum they induce in prices, whereas when the price reverts
fundamentalist traders also proﬁt from the higher positions accumulated due to
the marked divergences between price and fundamental value. The effect of a
technical dominance is also noticeable in the ACF curves, which show bulges
due to the anticorrelation induced by the technical strategy.
When the proportion of fundamentalist agents is equal or higher than the
proportion of technical agents, then price dynamics get a more realistic
appearance as the action of fundamentalist traders induce a dynamic similar to
that of a random walk.
3.3 Calibration
A handful of quantitative methods have been proposed to calibrate agent-based
ﬁnancial models. For example, Fabretti ( 2013) uses the optimisation method put
forward by Gilli and Winker ( 2003) and a genetic algorithm to calibrate parameters,
and Alfarano et al. ( 2005) propose to use the method of maximum likelihood to
estimate the parameters of a model for which a closed-form return distribution can
be derived.
In contrast to these technical methods, the approach we have used to calibrate the
parameters of our model is far more straightforward and intuitive. As there is a
direct correspondence between the behaviour of artiﬁcial traders and real traders,
most model parameters can be calibrated by looking at their empirical counterpart.
In Sect. 3.2 we have seen that results show a higher sensitivity with respect to the
parameters associated to the technical strategy than to the fundamentalist strategy or
the noise used in price or fundamental value formation process. It is thus specially
important to accurately calibrate these parameters, but the realism with which we
have implemented this strategy greatly facilitates the task. The entry and exit rules
employed by technical agents are the same than used by real traders, and we can get
information on which parameter values are usually employed in real markets by
turning again to practitioners literature.
Table 2 summarises the value of all the model parameters used in the results
described in the rest of sections. Next, we describe how these values have been
determined.
• Parameters associated to price formation The impact of traders in price
formation is normalised with the liquidity parameter k, so this parameter is
linked to the number of agents (the higher the trader population size, the higher
the liquidity). Although this parameter has an empirical interpretation, its value
is not observable, and it has then been calibrated by looking at the face validity
b Fig. 18 Sensitivity of model outputs to TREND short-term MA window [ wtr
S;min, wtr
S;max]. a Average of
price (in black) and fundamental value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and
technical (in green) traders. c Average autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared
returns. e Boxplot of return kurtosis. f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated
over 200 runs. (Color ﬁgure online)
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 335
123

Fig. 19 Sensitivity of model outputs to TREND long-term MA window [ wtr
L;min, wtr
L;max]. a Average of
price (in black) and fundamental value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and
technical (in green) traders. c Average autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared
returns. e Boxplot of return kurtosis. f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated
over 200 runs. (Color ﬁgure online)
336 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Fig. 20 Sensitivity of model outputs to TREND exit channel window [ wtr
C;min, wtr
C;max]. a Average of
price (in black) and fundamental value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and
technical (in green) traders. c Average autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared
returns. e Boxplot of return kurtosis. f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated
over 200 runs. (Color ﬁgure online)
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 337
123

Fig. 21 Sensitivity of model outputs to the percentage of fundamentalist traders. a Average of price (in
black) and fundamental value (in red). b Average proﬁts of fundamentalist (in orange) and technical (in
green) traders. c Average autocorrelation of returns. d Average autocorrelation of squared returns.
e Boxplot of return kurtosis. f Boxplot of return standard deviation. All averages are calculated over 200
runs. (Color ﬁgure online)
338 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

of simulation outputs (e.g. a small value of liquidity can result in diverging price
patterns) and the stylised facts replicated by the model.
• The random term in price formation (see Eq. 1) is governed by the standard
deviation parameter rP, whose value has been set to obtain an overall price
volatility value in line with empirical daily volatility of S&P500 in the last years
(assuming here that one time step is equivalent to one trading day).
• Parameters associated to fundamental value formation The fundamental value
process depends on the standard deviation term rV. As seen in Sect. 3.2, model
outputs are not sensitive to this parameter, and its value has been set by looking
at the face validity of simulation outputs.
• Parameters associated to the fundamentalist strategy Although we do not have
empirical evidence on which thresholds are used by fundamentalist traders, we
have used plausible values for the mispricing level required to enter and exit a
position ( Tf, sf), and we have ﬁne-tuned these values—together with the
unobservable parameter mf—by looking at the stylised facts replicated by the
model.
• Parameters associated to the technical strategy These are the parameters which
need a ﬁner calibration because they have a more noticeable impact on
simulation results. To implement the technical trading strategy, we have built on
techniques widely used in real markets, and so when it came to setting the values
of the different windows we turned to the practitioner literature. The windows
for the short- and long-term moving averages ( wtr
S , wtr
L ) move around 10 and 40
as these are the values usually employed by real technical investors (Kestner
2003); the window for the exit channel moves around 20 as this is the typical
period (Milton 2016).
3.4 Output validation
The application of computational methods to the rich collection of ﬁnancial data has
allowed to identify different statistical regularities that repeatedly appear in many
different markets and at different times (Giardina and Bouchaud 2003; Taylor
2005). These statistical regularities—known as stylised facts —are often used to
assess the validity of ﬁnancial market models, including ABMs: the better a model
reproduces one or more of these stylised facts, the more valid the model is.
The models reviewed in Sect. 1.3 reproduce some of the statistical properties
repeatedly observed in ﬁnancial markets, but there is no model capable of
reproducing all the stylised facts. Our model is not an exception: it replicates some
of these stylised facts but not all of them. Given the simplicity of our model, we can
deduce that the mechanism leading to these properties is the interaction between the
fundamentalist and technical agents: fundamentalist traders induce a dynamic
similar to that of a random walk (which is linked to properties such as the lack of
return autocorrelations or the unit roots), but technical traders induce correlations in
price movements (which are linked to properties such as volatility clustering). The
interaction of both groups allows to replicate in a greater or lesser degree some of
the stylised facts of stock markets.
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 339
123

We will study next to what extent our artiﬁcial market satisﬁes the main stylised
facts, in order to evaluate the output validity of the model. As in Sect. 3.1, average
results are based on 200 runs.
3.4.1 Lack of return autocorrelation
The autocorrelations of the time series of asset returns are usually insigniﬁcant,
except for very small time scales (Slanina 2014). This indicates that it is not possible
to know if the price of an asset will rise or fall in the next period (Cristelli 2014),
which is consistent with the efﬁcient market hypothesis.
In Fig. 22 we present the average autocorrelation function of the return series
obtained from our simulations. We can see that the autocorrelations tend to 0 when
the lag increases, although this decay is not as quick as observed in real markets.
3.4.2 Fat tails
Financial returns are commonly modelled with a normal distribution due to its
simplicity, but the empirical distribution of returns does not adjust to a Gaussian
bell, as it is more peaked and has more probability mass in the tails (Cont 2001).
The presence of fat tails implies that the price of an asset suffers extreme booms and
busts more often than predicted by a normal distribution.
As in real markets, the distribution of the return series obtained with our model is
more leptokurtic than the normal distribution. The histogram of returns (Fig. 23) has
more mass in the center and the tails than a normal distribution with the same mean
and variance (bell curve). Further evidence of fat tails is observed in the QQ-plot of
the return distribution (Fig. 24), which moves away from the diagonal—corre-
sponding to a normal distribution—in the queues. Furthermore, the mean of excess
kurtosis, which measures the size of the probability in the queues (Tsay 2005)i s
0.57 (with values comprised between 0.13 and 1.1), what indicates again that the
distribution of returns is leptokurtic.
Fig. 22 Average
autocorrelations of returns over
200 runs
340 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

3.4.3 Volatility clustering
Although returns are not autocorrelated, further analysis reveals that they are not
independent, either (Slanina 2014): the absolute value or the square of returns
exhibit signiﬁcant autocorrelation over days or even weeks for a variety of stocks
and indices (Cont 2001). This implies that big price changes are usually followed by
big changes (of any sign), and small changes are usually followed by small changes
(Chakraborti et al. 2011). When plotting the autocorrelation function of volatility—
where volatility can be estimated both as the absolute value or the square of
returns—we can see that it remains positive for several lags (Fig. 25), but decays to
0 faster than in real markets.
Although the autocorrelation function of volatility (Fig. 25) seems to decay to 0
at the same rate that the autocorrelation function of returns (Fig. 22), when studying
the long-term memory of both series we can observe a different internal structure.
Their Hurst exponent 4 reveals that the absolute value or the squared returns have
Fig. 23 Histogram of return
distribution for a single run
Fig. 24 QQ plot of return
distribution for a single run
4 When the decay of the autocorrelation function of a process follows a power law with exponent b \ 1,
the process is said to have long-term memory (Bouchaud et al. 2009), implying that events that occurred
long ago still have an impact on the current values (Thompson 2011). The Hurst exponent can be used to
ﬁnd out if a process has long-term memory, and is calculated as H ¼ 1 /C0 b
2 (Rickles 2011). A process with
long-term memory is characterised by having a Hurst exponent H 2 0:5; 1ðÞ (empirical studies have
found values H 2 0:7; 0:9ðÞ for equity markets (Oh et al. 2006; Yang et al. 2013)). The exponent of a
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 341
123

longer-term memory: the average Hurst exponent of volatility is H = 0.72 for the
absolute value of returns and H = 0.77 for the square of returns, what indicates that
these series have long-term memory, whereas the average Hurst exponent for the
returns is close to 0.5 ( H = 0.53), what indicates that this series has no long-term
memory. Even though these values are consistent with the Hurst values observed
empirically, it should be noted that it is difﬁcult to accurately measure the Hurst
exponent, specially if the series is affected by noise (Clegg 2006). Therefore, the
values shown here for the Hurst exponent 5 should be taken with some caution.
Having said this, it is anyway interesting to observe that the volatility series
invariably has a greater exponent than the return series—an indication that its
persistence or long-term memory is higher.
All these analyses reveal that it is not clear whether our model reproduces the
clustering of volatility: if we only based on the autocorrelation function, we would
say that the model does not replicate this property because the decay is faster than
observed in real markets, but when analysing the long-term memory of the volatility
series we can see that it has an underlying structure different from the return series
and displays long-term dependence as the empirical volatility.
3.4.4 Correlation between volume and volatility
The correlation between trading volume (calculated as the sum of orders issued by
all the agents in absolute value) and volatility is positive, as observed in real markets
(Cont 2001). Figure 26 shows the range of values of correlation between volume
and absolute value of returns, which moves between 0.57 and 0.70.
Fig. 25 Average autocorrelation of absolute value ( left) and square ( right) of returns over 200 runs
Footnote 4 continued
process with short-term memory (such as the series of returns) is H ¼ 0:5; and its autocorrelation function
decays faster (Bouchaud et al. 2009).
5 The Hurst exponent reported here has been calculated with the ‘hurstSpec’ function of the ‘fractal’
package of R. There are several functions available in R to calculate the Hurst exponent, and ‘hurstSpec’
has been reported to be the most accurate one (Stroe-Kunold et al. 2009).
342 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

3.4.5 Unit root
It cannot be statistically rejected that the series of stock prices follows a random walk
[which is a particular case of an AR(1) process with a unit root (Tsay 2005)],
consistently with the efﬁcient market hypothesis. The Dickey–Fuller test (see (Taylor
2005) for a description of the test) is the standard tool to detect whether an AR (1)
process is a random walk, and when applied to the time series of real or logarithmic
prices of an asset usually cannot reject the null hypothesis (Lux and Marchesi 2000).
When running the augmented Dickey–Fuller test with the time series of log-
prices obtained from simulations, the null hypothesis is accepted in 76% of runs, an
indication that the unit root property is satisﬁed in most simulations.
3.4.6 Leverage effect
The correlation between returns and future volatility of an asset is negative and
decays slowly to 0 (Cont 2001). This effect indicates that price movements have an
asymmetric impact on volatility: when the price falls (i.e., when the return is
negative), then the volatility increases, whereas if the price goes up (i.e., when the
return is positive), then the volatility is reduced (Dudukovic 2013). However, the
inverse relationship is not satisﬁed: the correlation between volatility and future
returns is nearly negligible (Cont 2001).
The plot of the cross-correlation function between the series of returns and past or
future volatility (Fig. 27) reveals that the model does not satisfy the leverage effect,
since the two series have no signiﬁcant correlations for any lag. In fact, in the case that
the two series were correlated, the leverage effect could not be satisﬁed, since the
behaviour of our model is perfectly symmetrical for both a price increase or a decrease.
3.4.7 Taylor effect
The autocorrelations of the absolute value of returns are usually higher than those
obtained with the squared returns (Cont 2001). More generally, the autocorrelation
of the series | rt|d reaches a maximum when d is around 1 (Ding et al. 1993).
Fig. 26 Boxplot of the
correlation between volume and
volatility over 200 runs
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 343
123

To study if our model exhibits the Taylor effect we include in Fig. 28 the graph
of the autocorrelation function of | rt|d as a function of d for different lags. The
Taylor effect is satisﬁed when these curves reach their maximum value around
d = 1 (marked with a vertical dashed line). As illustrated in Fig. 28, the Taylor
effect is not met, because the maximum autocorrelation for some lags is achieved in
d = 2 or even d = 3.
3.4.8 Volume autocorrelation
The empirical time series of volume (number of shares purchased and sold during a
time interval) is autocorrelated (Covrig and Ng2004)—as happens with the time series
of volatility—and has long-term memory (Rossi and Santucci de Magistris 2013).
The autocorrelation function of the volume series obtained from simulations
remains positive for several lags and decays slowly to 0, as shown in Fig. 29.
Moreover, the Hurst exponent proves that the series of volume has long-term
memory (its average value is H = 0.93).
Fig. 27 Cross-correlation
function between the series of
volatility and returns for a single
run
Fig. 28 Taylor effect:
autocorrelation function of | rt|d
as a function of d for a single run
344 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

3.4.9 Volatility skewness
The distribution of volatility (absolute or squared returns) is very asymmetric, with
higher frequency of large values than a normal distribution (Sinclair 2013). In fact,
the distribution of volatility ﬁts to a log-normal, although the tails seem to follow a
power law (Slanina 2014).
The histogram of the absolute value of resulting returns (Fig. 30) reveals that the
distribution is asymmetrical, with the bulk of observations lying on the right as
observed in real markets. The skewness is positive in all the runs (its mean value is
1.3), what indicates that the left tail has a greater mass than the right one.
Fig. 29 Average
autocorrelation of volume over
200 runs
Table 3 Graphical summary of stylised facts satisﬁed by the model
Stylised fact Test/analysis Is the test satisﬁed?
Lack of return autocorrelation Autocorrelation plot Partially
Hurst exponent Yes
Fat tails Histogram Yes
QQ plot Yes
Excess kurtosis Yes
Volatility clustering Autocorrelation plot Partially
Hurst exponent Yes
Correlation volume-volatility Correlation between volume and volatility Yes
Unit root Dickey–Fuller test Yes
Leverage effect Cross-correlation between returns and volatility No
Taylor effect Taylor plot No
Volume autocorrelation Autocorrelation plot Yes
Hurst exponent Yes
Volatility skewness Histogram Yes
Skewness Yes
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 345
123

3.4.10 Summary
We summarise next in a graphical way which stylised facts are reproduced by our
model. We can observe that the model does not perfectly replicate the whole set of
stylised facts. In this regard, it is in line with the other ABMs of ﬁnancial markets
available in the literature, as there is no model that is able to reproduce all statistical
properties listed in Table 3.
4 Conclusions
In this article we have presented an ABM of a stock market populated by
fundamentalist and technical traders, which are the most popular trading approaches
in ﬁnancial markets. The implementation of this model has allowed us to reﬂect on
some aspects related to the validation and calibration of ABMs.
Instead of building the model from scratch, we have replicated the model of
Farmer and Joshi ( 2002), which is one of the most relevant and well-known ABM of
ﬁnancial markets. This model-to-model exercise—also considered a type of
validation by some authors—has allowed us to detect a recurring behaviour against
common sense in the FJ model: the technical strategy never makes any proﬁt, and
this situation is non-sensible given that a loss-making strategy would soon disappear
from real markets.
In our review of ABMs of ﬁnancial markets we have realised that this type of
obvious behaviours are seldom checked, so one runs the risk of having models
which are valid according to the usual criteria but not sensible. For this reason, we
have argued that it is also necessary to look at common-sense evidence and
incorporate it into models, instead of only looking at the statistical stylised facts as
usually done in artiﬁcial markets.
Following this line of argumentation, we have modiﬁed the FJ model by
implementing a new technical strategy that is competitive. To do so, we have turned
to the practitioners literature and reproduced one of the most widely used technical
Fig. 30 Histogram of volatility
distribution for a single run
346 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

strategies. Here lies another contribution of this paper: we advocate for the
implementation of agent behaviours close to the real ones, as this greatly facilitates
the calibration of the model and the interpretation of results. We are aware that the
feasibility of this task depends on the subject area: in the ﬁnancial arena, many
traders use mechanistic rules which can be seamlessly translated to coded agent
rules. However, in other areas it can be more difﬁcult to achieve such a level of
homeomorphism between artiﬁcial and real behaviour; even in this case, we
encourage the modelling of realistic agent behaviours, either by drawing on relevant
literature as done in this paper or by directly involving stakeholders [as done for
example under the companion modelling approach (Barreteau et al. 2014)].
After building the model, we have validated it in an extensive way. The usual
practice in ABMs of ﬁnancial markets is to validate the simulation outputs
comparing them with a set of statistical stylised facts. Here, we have used an
extended validation procedure consisting of four steps—face validation, sensitivity
analysis, calibration and output validation—which has allowed us to provide a more
comprehensive assessment of the model validity. It would be beneﬁcial to
generalise the adoption of an extended validation method as the one used here as
this would provide valuable information on some aspects which are usually
neglected, such as the sensitivity of the model to its parameters, or the calibration
method.
The stock market model presented here is a ﬁrst step in the construction of a more
ambitious ABM. The work described in this paper ensures that our fundamental-
ist ? technical model is a realistic, sensible and valid testbed with which to test the
effect of other market mechanisms, such as the inclusion of risk management
practices (work reported elsewhere).
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful and
constructive comments.
References
Alfarano S, Lux T, Wagner F (2005) Estimation of agent-based models: the case of an asymmetric
herding model. Comput Econ 26:19–49
Arthur W, Holland J, LeBaron B, Palmer R, Tayler P (1996) Asset pricing under endogenous expectations
in an artiﬁcial stock market. SFI working paper
Balci O (1995) Principles and techniques of simulation validation, veriﬁcation, and testing. In:
Proceedings of the 1995 winter simulation conference, pp 147–154
Barreteau O, Bousquet F, E´tienne M, Souche`re V, d’Aquino P (2014) Companion modelling: a method of
adaptive and participatory research. In: E ´tienne M (ed) Companion modelling. E ´ditions Quae,
Versailles, pp 13–40
Bianchi C, Cirillo P, Gallegati M, Vagliasindi P (2007) Validating and calibrating agent-based models: a
case study. Comput Econ 30:245–264
Bonenkamp U (2010) Combining technical and fundamental trading strategies. Gabler, Heidelberg
Bouchaud P, Farmer J, Lillo F (2009) How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. In:
Hens T, Schenk-Hoppe´ K (eds) Handbook of ﬁnancial markets: dynamics and evolution. North
Holland/Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 57–160
Carley K (1996) Validating computational models. Working paper: social and decision sciences, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 347
123

Chakraborti A, Toke I, Patriarca M, Abergel F (2011) Econophysics review: I. empirical facts. Quant
Financ 11(7):991–1012
Clegg R (2006) A practical guide to measuring the Hurst parameter. In: 21st UK performance engineering
workshop, school of computing science technical report series, CSTR-916, Newcastle, pp 43–55
Cont R (2001) Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quant Financ
1:223–236
Covrig V, Ng L (2004) Volume autocorrelation, information, and investor trading. J Bank Financ
28:2155–2174
Cristelli M (2014) Complexity in ﬁnancial markets. Springer, New York
Ding Z, Granger C, Engle R (1993) A long memory property of stock market returns and a new model.
J Empir Financ 1:83–106
Dosi G, Fagiolo G, Roventini A (2006) An evolutionary model of endogenous business cycles. Comput
Econ 27:3–34
Dudukovic S (2013) Capturing stylized facts of stock market volatility and higher order cumulant
function. In: Cambridge business & economics conference (CBEC), Cambridge
Edmonds B, Moss S (2005) From KISS to KIDS—an ‘anti-simplistic’ modelling approach. In: Davidsson
P, Logan B, Takadama K (eds) Multi-agent and multi-agent-based simulation, vol 34. Springer,
Heidelberg, pp 130–144
Fabretti A (2013) On the problem of calibrating an agent based model for ﬁnancial markets. J Econ
Interact Coord 8:277–293
Fagiolo G, Windrum P, Moneta A (2006) Empirical validation of agent-based models: a critical survey.
LEM working paper2006/14, Pisa
Fagiolo G, Moneta A, Windrum P (2007) A critical guide to empirical validation of agent-based models
in economics: methodologies, procedures, and open problems. Comput Econ 30:195–226
Farmer J, Joshi S (2002) The price dynamics of common trading strategies. J Econ Behav Organ
49:149–171
Feng L, Li B, Podobnik B, Preis T, Stanley E (2012) Linking agent-based models and stochastic models
of ﬁnancial markets. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(22):8388–8393
Frenken K (2005) History, state and prospects of evolutionary models of technical change: a review with
special emphasis on complexity theory. Utrecht University
Giardina I, Bouchaud J (2003) Volatility clustering in agent based market model. In: Gallegati M, Kirman
A, Marsili M (eds) The complex dynamics of economic interaction. Springer, Berlin, pp 171–196
Gilbert N (2004) Open problems in using agent-based models in industrial and labor dynamics. In:
Leombruni R, Richiardi M (eds) Industry and labor dynamics: the agent-based computational
approach. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, pp 401–405
Gilli M, Winker P (2003) A global optimization heuristic for estimating agent based models. Comput Stat
Data Anal 42:299–312
Hales D, Rouchier J, Edmonds B (2003) Model-to-model analysis. J Artif Soc Soc Simul 6(4):5
Hommes C (2006) Heterogeneous agent models in economics and ﬁnance. In: Tesfatsion K, Judd K (eds)
Handbook of computational economics, vol 2. North Holland/Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1109–1186
Janssen M, Ostrom E (2006) Empirically based, agent-based models. Ecol Soc 11(2):37
Johnson N, Jefferies P, Ming Hui P (2003) Financial market complexity. Oxford University Press, New York
Kahneman D, Tversky A (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica
47:313–327
Kestner L (2003) Quantitative trading strategies. McGraw-Hill, New York
Klu¨ gl F (2008) A validation methodology for agent-based simulations. In: SAC’08, Fortaleza
LeBaron B (2006) Agent-based computational ﬁnance. In: Tesfatsion L, Judd K (eds) Handbook of
computational economics, vol 2. North Holland/Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1188–1233
LeBaron B, Yamamoto R (2007) Long-memory in an order-driven market. Physica A 383:85–89
LeBaron B, Arthur W, Palmer R (1999) Time series properties of an artiﬁcial stock market. J Econ
Dynam Control 23:1487–1516
LiCalzi M, Pellizzari P (2006) Breeds of risk-adjusted fundamentalist strategies in an order-driven
market. Physica A 359:619–633
Lux T, Marchesi M (1999) Scaling and criticality in a stochastic multi-agent model of a ﬁnancial market.
Nature 397:498–500
Lux T, Marchesi M (2000) Volatility clustering in ﬁnancial markets: a microsimulation of interacting
agents. Int J Theor Appl Financ 3(4):675–702
Madhavan A (2000) Market microstructure: a survey. Marshall School of Business, Los Angeles
348 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123

Malerba F, Nelson R, Orsenigo L, Winter S (1999) ‘History-friendly’ models of industry evolution: the
computer industry. Ind Corp Change 8(1):3–40
Malkiel B (1973) A random walk down Wall Street. Norton, New York
Martı´nez-Jaramillo S, Tsang E (2009) Evolutionary computation and artiﬁcial ﬁnancial markets. In:
Brabazon A, O’Neill M (eds) Natural computing in computational ﬁnance, vol 2. Springer, Berlin,
pp 137–179
Menkhoff L (2010) The use of technical analysis by fund managers: international evidence. J Bank
Finance 34:2573–2586
Milton A (2016) Day trading with Donchian channels. From the balance: https://www.thebalance.-
com/day-trading-with-donchian-channels-1031186. Retrieved 20 Feb 2017
Moss S (2008) Alternative approaches to the empirical validation of agent-based models. J Artif Soc Soc
Simul 11(1):5
Moss S, Edmonds B (2005) Sociology and simulation: statistical and qualitative cross-validation. Am J
Sociol 110(4):1095–1131
Murphy J (1999) Technical analysis of the ﬁnancial markets. New York Institute of Finance, Paramus
Ngo T, See L (2012) Calibration and validation of agent-based models of land cover change. In:
Heppenstall A, Crooks A, See L, Batty M (eds) Agent-based models of geographical systems.
Springer, Dordrecht, pp 181–197
North M, Macal C (2007) Managing business complexity—discovering strategic solutions with agent-
based modeling and simulation. Oxford University Press, New York
Oh G, Kim S, Eom C (2006) Long-term memory and volatility clustering in daily and high-frequency price
changes. http://www.long-memory.com/returns/OhUmKim2006.pdf. Arxiv preprint physics/0601174
O’Neill B (2011) Fundamentals of the stock market. McGraw-Hill, New York
Pascual J, Pajares J, Lo ´pez-Paredes A (2006) Explaining the statistical features of the Spanish stock
market from the bottom-up. In: Bruun C (ed) Advances in artiﬁcial economics: the economy as a
complex dynamic system. Springer, Berlin, pp 283–294
Raberto M, Cincotti S, Focardi S, Marchesi M (2003) Traders’ long-run wealth in an artiﬁcial ﬁnancial
market. Comput Econ 22:255–272
Rickles D (2011) Econophysics and the complexity of ﬁnancial markets. In: Hooker C (ed) Philosophy of
complex systems. North Holland/Elsevier, Oxford, pp 531–566
Rossi E, Santucci de Magistris P (2013) Long memory and tail dependence in trading volume and
volatility. J Empir Financ 22:94–112
Sargent R (1998) Veriﬁcation and validation of simulation models. In: Proceedings of the 1998 Winter
Simulation Conference, pp. 121–130
Shimokawa T, Suzuki K, Misawa T (2007) An agent-based approach to ﬁnancial stylized facts. Physica A
379:207–225
Sinclair E (2013) Volatility trading, 2nd edn. Wiley, Hoboken
Slanina F (2014) Essentials of econophysics modelling. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Stroe-Kunold E, Stadnytska T, Werner J, Braun S (2009) Estimating long-range dependence in time
series: an evaluation of estimators implemented in R. Behav Res Methods 41(3):909–923
Taylor S (2005) Asset price dynamics, volatility, and prediction. Princeton University Press, Princeton
ten Broeke G, van Voorn G, Ligtenberg A (2016) Which sensitivity analysis method should i use for my
agent-based model? J Artif Soc Soc Simul 19(1):5
Thompson S (2011) The stylised facts of stock price movements. N Z Rev Econ Financ 1:50–77
Tsay R (2005) Analysis of ﬁnancial time series, 2nd edn. Wiley, Hoboken
Wei J, Huang J, Hui P (2013) An agent-based model of stock markets incorporating momentum investors.
Physica A 392:2728–2735
Werker C, Brenner T (2004) Empirical calibration of simulation models. Max Planck Institute, Papers of
economics and evolution #0410
Westerhoff F (2010) A simple agent-based ﬁnancial market model: direct interactions and comparisons of
trading proﬁts. In: Bischi G, Chiarella C, Gardini L (eds) Nonlinear dynamics in economics, ﬁnance
and the social sciences. Springer, Berlin, pp 313–332
Windrum P, Fagiolo G, Moneta A (2007) Empirical validation of agent-based models: alternatives and
prospects. J Artif Soc Soc Simul 10(2):8
Yang C, Wang R, Hu S (2013) Modeling and analysis of an agent-based model for Chinese stock market.
Phys Lett A 377:2041–2046
Zeigler B (1985) Theory of modelling and simulation. Krieger, Malabar
Using realistic trading strategies in an agent-based … 349
123

Ba`rbara Llacay holds a degree in Mathematics from the Polytechnic University of Catalonia and a Ph.D.
from the University of Barcelona. She is Associate Professor of mathematics at the University of
Barcelona and is doing research on agent-based simulation of ﬁnancial markets. She has managed several
EC funded projects in ICT at CIMNE.
Gilbert Peffer is heading an effort at CIMNE to promote and advance quantitative and computational
methodologies focusing particularly on ﬁnancial, socio-economic and organisational problems. He has
managed a number of European projects in the area of ICT simulation (eLearning, and eBusiness).
Previously vice-president in the ﬁxed-income quantitative research division at Salomon Brothers, a US
investment bank (now Citigroup), he has participated extensively in scientiﬁc simulation and application/
technology integration projects in the ﬁnancial industry. Mr. Peffer holds a degree in Aerospace
Engineering.
350 B. Llacay, G. Peffer
123
