V alidating agent-based marketing models through conjoint analysis ☆
Rosanna Garcia a,⁎, Paul Rummel b, John Hauser c
a Northeastern University, United States
b Comdel, Inc., United States
c Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States
Received 1 March 2006; received in revised form 1 December 2006; accepted 1 February 2007
Abstract
Agent-based modelers in the field of marketing research have paid little attention to validation issues. This paper provides a definition of
validation relevant for this community of modelers. On the basis of a history-friendly model for simulation calibration [Malerba, F., Nelson, R.,
Orsenigo, L., and Winter, S. (1999). ‘History-friendly’ models of industry evolution: the computer industry. Industrial and corporate change, 8(1),
3–40.], the authors demonstrate how conjoint analyses can be used to instantiate and calibrate an agent-based marketing model. Methods for
model instantiation using conjoint partworths and model calibration using the conjoint first-choice rule are demonstrated. When the model
matches the results of the first-choice rules for consumer preferences, the modeler can feel more confident that calibration has been achieved.
When verification replicates stylized facts on a macro-level, the model is one step closer to validation. Because conjoint data results are
meaningful on an individual level as well as on an aggregate level, this type of empirical data collection is ideal for agent-based marketing models.
© 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Conjoint analyses; Agent-based modeling; V alidation; Calibration; History-friendly model
1. Introduction
V alidation of computational models is an area of concern to
simulation modelers ( Conway, 1963; Knepell and Arangno,
1993; LeBaron, in press ). Different types of validation ( Knepell
and Arangno, 1993 ), different levels of validation ( Carley,
1996) as well as different methodologies for conducting
validation ( Carley, 1996; Fagiolo et al., 2005 ) have resulted.
These differing studies, along with feedback loops, path
dependencies, sensitivities to internal conditions, and the
unpredictability of agent adaptation ( Fagiolo et al., 2005 )
associated with empirically based agent-based models (ABMs),
easily confound the task of validation. Important questions
asked by agent-based modelers, especially those investigating
real-world systems, are: which methods of validation are best?
Which levels should be considered? How does one know a
model is correct?
Agent-based modelers in the field of marketing research
have paid little attention to these validation issues. The goal of
this paper is therefore two-fold: to provide a definition of
validation relevant for agent-based modelers in marketing
research and to introduce a calibration method based on
conjoint analysis that incorporates real-world data into a
marketing-oriented agent-based simulation. The paper first
provides a definition for validation and for validation levels that
are important to this community of agent-based modelers.
Drawing upon reviews grounded in agent-based computational
economics (ACE) by Carley (1996) and Fagiolo et al. (2005) ,
the authors then briefly present three methodologies used to
seek validity in ABM simulations. This foundation serves to
demonstrate how conjoint analysis can be used to calibrate an
agent-based marketing model.
Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 – 857
☆ The authors acknowledge the support of Northeastern University's Institute
for Global Innovation Management for this research. They also wish to thank the
participants of the Agent-based Models of Market Dynamics and Consumer
Behavior Symposium 2006 at the University of Surrey, Guilford, as well as
Walter McManus and Colette Friedrich for their comments on earlier versions of
this paper. Finally, the authors offer their sincere thanks to Olivier Toubia, who
was a critical contributor to the conjoint analyses. Send correspondence to
Rosanna Garcia, Assistant Professor of Marketing, Northeastern University,
Boston, MA USA 02115 ( r.garcia@neu.edu).
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: r.garcia@neu.edu (R. Garcia).
0148-2963/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.02.007

The next section establishes definitions for validation and
introduces three calibration methodologies; indirect calibration,
the Werker–Brenner calibration approach ( Werker and Brenner,
2004), and the history-friendly calibration approach ( Malerba et
al., 1999 ). Finally, by using an example of a history-friendly
approach based on the wine industry, the paper demonstrates
how conjoint analysis is used to calibrate an ABM. Henceforth,
the authors refer to ABMs that focus on market behavior as
agent-based marketing models (AMM).
1.1. Defining validation
Although numerous definitions for validation exist, this
study specifically focuses on the empirical validation of a
computerized marketing model. A validated model will possess
a satisfactory range of accuracy matching the simulated model
to the real-world model ( Fagiolo, et al., 2005 ). AMMs usually
include individuals, either at a consumer level or a firm level,
who are being observed at the market or industry level. Thus,
when validating AMMs, matching should occur on both a micro
and a macro-level. In addition, an empirically validated model is
grounded on qualitative and quantitative data collected from the
system being investigated. V alidation determines that the
conceptual simulation model (as opposed to the computer
program) is an accurate representation of the real-world system
under study ( Kennedy et al., 2005 ), as supported by empirical
data.
Carley (1996) suggests four validation levels – grounding,
calibration, verification, and harmonizing – in order to properly
investigate both micro and macro economic levels. Grounding,
which includes establishing face validity, parameter validity,
and process validity, should occur first ( Carley, 1996 ). Face
validity pertains to whether the output looks valid to vested-
interest parties. In establishing face validity, the model should
set forth how the simulation represents the real-world and
should delineate the model's scope based on qualitative and
quantitative empirical data. Parameter validity examines if the
characteristics and initial conditions assigned to an agent of the
model appear realistic. Process validity ascertains whether the
overall model simulation makes sense on a macro-level. The
process should include the appropriate players, and these
players should interact in a realistic manner. A causal model, as
demonstrated in Fig. 1 , is often good for establishing process
validity. During grounding, boundaries should be established on
both a micro and a macro-level. For example, in a model of
diffusion, individual consumers will purchase a set limit of
products monthly, and overall, diffusion will typically follow an
S-shaped curve. Limiting consumer purchase amounts is an
example of setting parameter boundaries on a micro-level and
monitoring the diffusion rate is an example of obtaining face
validity on a macro-level. The model investigated in this study
incorporates conjoint data gathered during grounding analyses,
and is tuned to these data during the calibration process.
Calibration, the next step, is the process of tuning a model to
fit detailed empirically supported data ( Levitt et al., 1994;
Carley, 1990). During calibration, model parameters and initial
conditions are tested and tweaked so that the behaviors of
individual agents in the model are consistent with empirical
micro-level characteristics of the modeled agents ( Carley,
1996). The model is considered to be calibrated when the
simulated model matches some particular, unrelated features
of historical data that are drawn from macro-level data ( Fagiolo
et al., 2005 ).
V erification, which occurs after calibration, establishes
whether the macro-individual simulated model captures the
intent of the real-world model. During verification, parameters
are not adjusted to fit the model. The focus is on the validation
of the model's results, not on its internal workings. To verify a
model, the model's outcomes are compared graphically or
statistically with empirical data. With multi-agent marketing
models, verification should occur at both the individual and the
industry level. Specifically, if the purpose of the model is to
explain individual level phenomena based on generic agents,
the model should also be verified at the industry level. If the
purpose of the model is to examine industry level (organization-
level) phenomena based on specific actions of heterogeneous
Fig. 1. Causal model.
849R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

agents, then the model should also be verified at the individual
level (Carley, 1996). Although calibration and verification often
become synonymous with validation, they are both separate
tasks that occur during validation procedures. Calibration can
be thought of as the validation of a simulated model's inputs and
verification can be thought of as the validation of a model's
outputs.
For the model to be predictive, the validation step of
harmonization is used to show that theoretical assumptions
embodied in the simulated model are in harmony with the real-
world based on quantitative data ( Carley, 1996). One method of
establishing harmony is by comparing the predictive outputs of
the computative model with the predictions of a linear model
(Stone, 1994 ).
As the modeler moves through each level of validation
(grounding, calibration, verification and harmonization), the
model becomes more refined. Grounding sets up the model,
calibration fine-tunes the model, verification matches the model
to real-world phenomena, and harmonization tests the model to
the proposed hypotheses developed. In order to have the model
validated sufficiently, evaluating all levels of validation should
be considered. This will increase the modeler's confidence that
the model is sufficiently suitable for achieving the intended
goal. The following section will discuss the methodologies to
accomplish validation.
1.2. Calibration methodologies seeking validation
Fagiolo et al. (2005) proposed three different types of
validation-seeking calibratio n methodologies: the indirect
calibration approach, the Werker –Brenner empirical calibration
approach ( Werker and Brenner, 2004 ), and the history-friendly
approach. The indirect calibration approach uses a combination
of stylized facts and empirical data to build a model where the
micro-level description is modeled in a not-too-unrealistic
fashion ( Fagiolo et al., 2005 , pg. 23). Stylized facts, a term
commonly used in economic theory, are observations generally
understood to be empirical truths to which theories must fit. The
stylized facts are used to restrict the parameter space and initial
conditions. The goal of the indirect calibration approach is to
establish a realistic model.
The Werker–Brenner approach also uses stylized facts and
empirical data to establish the model. However, this method
adds an additional step that makes use of Bayesian inference
procedures to verify that the output of the model matches the
real-world data ( Werker and Brenner, 2004 ). This approach
requires two sets of empirical data: one to calibrate the model
and one to verify the model. This can be accomplished by
splitting the results of a single empirical study into two sets.
The history-friendly approach uses a specific case study set
in a particular industry to guide modeling of parameters, agent
interactions, and agent decis ion rules. Like the indirect
calibration approach, the goal of this method is to reduce a
model's dimensionality on the basis of empirical evidence. This
approach combines the results of qualitative and quantitative
data collection. Ethnographic research conducted in a particular
industry is used to specify the agents ’ behaviors, their decision
rules, and interactions between agents and the environment in
which they conduct marketing transactions. This approach uses
quantitative data to establish initial conditions and initialize
parameters. Model validation compares the model output with
the actual history of the case study. Malerba et al. (1999) note,
“It is worth emphasizing that it is not the purpose of history-
friendly modeling to produce simulations that closely match the
quantitative values observed in the historical episode under
investigation. The goal is to match overall patterns in qualitative
features, particularly the trend behavior of the key descriptors of
industry structure and performance ”, (pg. 4). Examples of
history-friendly models (HFMs) have focused on computer and
pharmaceutical firms to provide the researcher with knowledge
of model building, analysis, and validation of the dynamic
evolution of the entire industry ( Malerba et al., 1999; Malerba
and Orsenigo, 2002 ).
This study uses the history-friendly approach to look at a
specific issue within an industry: the diffusion of screw cap
closures on bottles of fine wines within the New Zealand wine
industry. This approach is most appropriate when modeling an
episodic event (Malerba et al., 1999), such as the diffusion of an
innovation. Four steps typically occur in developing an HFM
agent-based model: describing the industry background,
delineating the main theoretical issues to be explored,
developing the computational model, and presenting the results
of the model. The remainder of this paper completes steps 1 –3
but does not report on step 4, the results of the fully validated
model. A detailed account of step 4 is reserved for future
reporting in order to maintain appropriate focus on calibration
methodologies for agent-based marketing models (AMMs). The
next section demonstrates the development and calibration of
the AMM using the history-friendly approach, based upon this
case study (see Fig. 2 ).
2. History-friendly mode l of the New Zealand wine
industry
History-friendly models (HFMs) attempt to bring together
empirical analyses, general theories, formal modeling, and
stylized facts observed within an industry. The HFM of this
Fig. 2. Framework for empirical calibration of AMMs (based on Madey, et al.
2002).
850 R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

study is based on an episodic event staged within the New
Zealand wine industry. This is a rapidly expanding industry
with a growth rate of over 150% from 1995 to 2005; there are
now more than 500 wineries in New Zealand. Low entry
barriers and global market acceptance of New Zealand wines
has allowed even new entrants to be profitable. The New
Zealand Winegrowers, an organization established in March
2002 to represent both independent grape growers and wineries,
suggest that the economic growth of their industry reflects the
“value of a united approach to industry issues. Innovation,
learning, cooperation and quality have been at the heart of the
New Zealand wine industry's rapid development in past years ”,
(New Zealand Grape and Wine Industry Statistical Annual,
2005).
One of the factors driving the growth of this industry is the
high quality and distinctive Sauvignon Blancs of New Zealand,
which make up 45% of the total harvest. A major concern of the
wineries producing white wines is the freshness and fruitiness of
these delicate wines. A problem that has surfaced in this
growing industry is the availability of bottle closures that
preserve the true quality and taste of New Zealand wines.
Industry analysts report that 2 –15% of all wine bottled with
natural cork closures are plagued by cork taint, a condition
where poor quality corks cause the wine to lose flavor ( Sogg,
2005). Often the consumer does not realize that the poor taste is
due to cork taint and blames the offending flavor on a poor
vintage or a cheap brand. Hence, the wine manufacturer
potentially loses a customer in addition to incurring the cost of
replacing the bottle. The result is millions of dollars of lost
revenue as well as brand-name erosion when consumers
attribute the poor wine quality to the winery rather than to the
closure.
One solution to the problem of cork taint is to use screw cap
closures. The screw cap was tested for feasibility as a wine
closure device in the late 1950s and early 1960s, after which the
Yalumba Wine Company introduced the innovation into the
Australian market in the late 1970s. Screw caps (often called by
their brand-name, Stelvin) have been found to eliminate cork
taint and other problems found with cork closures, such as
crumbling and leakage ( Murray and Lockshin, 1997 ). Stelvins
are said to allow consistent, reliable, aging characteristics,
showing the wine's development as the winemaker intended
(Courtney, 2001 ), which makes them highly suitable closures
for white wines. Between 1976 and the early 1980s, the screw
cap closure served to seal approximately 20 million wine bottles
in Australia and New Zealand ( Courtney, 2001). By 1984, the
Australasian producers had stopped using the Stelvin because of
consumer resistance to a screw cap closure. The effect on
Yalumba's Pewsey V ale Riesling, an early Australian introduc-
tion, almost killed the brand as a prestige product ( Bourne,
2000).
This unsuccessful introduction, however, did not completely
destroy the innovation. Driven by belief of the superiority of
screw caps over cork closures, especially for white wines, a
group of 15 winemakers from the Clare V alley of Australia
selected the Stelvin for closing their premium Rieslings in 2000.
Having gained insights from previous introduction failures over
the previous twenty years, this collaborative of Australian
wineries launched a marketing campaign, “Riesling with a
Twist”, which communicated to the media, consumers, and
retailers the quality aspects of the innovative seal. The success
of the Australian launch motivated 27 New Zealand wineries to
form the New Zealand Wine Seal Initiative ( www.screwcap.co.
nz/), launched in August 2001. Key roles of the Initiative were
to promote the use of screw caps, to provide technical education
and support to members regarding the use of screw cap wine
seals, and to educate the wine trade, wine press, and wine
consumers about the benefits of using screw caps. In 2005, the
Initiative consisted of more than 40 members wineries,
representing the best of New Zealand's premium wine
producers. The Initiative represented both large and small
wineries and today, according to estimates, 80% of wines
bottled in New Zealand use screw cap seals ( Sogg, 2005 ).
The issue of consumer resistance to this innovative closure
for the wine industry is interesting in terms of the stark contrast
between the high performance of the new closure and its lack of
acceptance by consumers. Although screw caps perform well in
preserving the quality of wine ( Hart and Kleinig, 2005 ), some
consumers still prefer the romance of the cork ( Courtney, 2001).
Accordingly, the screw cap is often referred to as a resistant
innovation because the consumer resists using or purchasing the
innovation due to particular perceptions or misperceptions. The
remainder of this paper discusses model development, starting
with theory formulation and concluding with simulation results.
2.1. Theoretical foundation of the New Zealand wine industry
HFM
The simulation model of this study addresses a single
stylized episode that can be summarized as follows. With a
growing domestic market in an increasingly competitive global
market, New Zealand wineries shared a concern with respect to
the ability to deliver a distinctive, quality product to wine
consumers around the world. This concern mainly focused on
the diminishing availability of high quality cork closures due to
limited natural cork resources. Fickle consumers had previously
rejected the alternative to cork closures, the Stelvin closure.
Traditional marketing techniques had not been effective in
diffusing this resistant innovation into the marketplace ( Garcia
and Atkin, 2005 ). Buoyed by the success of the alliance of
Australian wineries, a group of New Zealand wineries formed
their own collaborative with the specific goal of promoting the
use and benefits of the screw type closure (Stelvin) to
consumers and the media.
This paper proposes that the New Zealand collaborative used
a strategy of coopetition to diffuse the Stelvin among a
population of resistant customers. Coopetition is a form of a
strategic alliance in which two or more interorganizational firms
in the same industry, who normally compete against each other,
instead cooperate to accomplish a specific goal ( Brandenburger
and Nalebuff, 1996; Gomes-Casseres, 1996; Harbison and
Pekar, 1998 ). Firms have embraced coopetitive alliances in
order (a) to exchange patents and other knowledge, (b) to
undertake collaborative research and development activities, (c)
851R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

to build market alliances for setting new standards, and (d) to
establish collaborative agreements to integrate existing busi-
nesses (Garraffo, 2002). By working together cooperating firms
can maximize their resources, stimulate knowledge develop-
ment and utilization, and expand market opportunities ( Jorde
and Teece, 1989 ). By forming the New Zealand Wine Seal
Initiative, 27 innovative wineries utilized a coopetition strategy
for diffusing a resistant innovation into the marketplace.
The above discussion gives a broad outline of what one
would expect to see in a simulated industry history and points to
some of the stylized facts that need to be treated in the
specification of the model's dynamics. In order to capture the
coopetitive environment, the model typifies the wineries as
seeking to maximize their market share, MS i.
MSi ¼ Si
PK
k¼1
Sk
ð1Þ
where Si is the number of bottles sold with Stelvin closures by
firm i and ΣSk is the total number of Stelvins sold in the
marketplace. The primary goal is to introduce the resistant inno-
vation into the marketplace and to gain market share in an
increasingly competitive industry. For the firm, profits are
calculated each period, t,a s ;
P ¼ Np−Nk−NsldiA ð2Þ
where N is the number of total bottles sold, p is the price of the
wine to the consumer (distribution channels are not modeled in),
k is the production cost of a single bottle, Ns is the number of
bottles sold with a Stelvin closure, and δiA is 1 if the firm is in
the alliance and 0 if otherwise. (As a first-order model, Eq. (2)
does not model economies or diseconomies of scale.) Each
winery that joins the alliance is required to pay a per bottle levy,
l, to the alliance for the cost of the advertising program. Product
offerings include both cork closures and Stelvin cap closures
with constant production costs for all types of wines produced.
Although the screw cap closure itself is less expensive than the
cork closure, the costs of manufacturing the threaded necks of
wine bottles necessary for screw caps equal the manufacturing
costs of the cork.
Consumer demand drives the manufacturing decisions of
firms (wineries). When making a purchase decision, the
consumer chooses product offerings by randomly selecting
firms; these product offerings become the choice set. Con-
sumers then refer to their combined partworths to evaluate the
product offerings within the choice set, and to then select the
most preferred offering. In other words, they choose the product
that maximizes their utility, such that:
Uij ¼ fp j
/C0/C1
þ
XM
m¼1
ximdj þ xiS dj ð3Þ
xiS tðÞ¼ xiSðt/C0 1Þ þ xmax NZ − PxNZ½/C138 q/ðÞ ð 4Þ
where i represents the individual, m the attribute, j the product
offering, ωis (t) the Stelvin partworth for the jth product (with a
Stelvin closure) at time t, pj the price of product j, and δj is 1
for the product choice being evaluated, and 0 if otherwise.
[ωmaxNZ − ω¯ NZ] is a constant, which is the difference between
the highest Stelvin closure partworth for a New Zealand
respondent and the average partworths for Stelvins by all New
Zealand respondents. Eq. (4) captures the evolution of the
partworth for Stelvin closures. The evolution function, ρ(ϕ),
represents the rapidity with which each consumer's partworth
evolves from the current NZ average to the NZ maximum.
Product j also can be a product with a higher utility than the
options in the choice set, leading to no purchase of wine. Price is
modeled as a function to capture the scaling issues in the utility
definition. In the simulation, price points for different types of
wine fluctuate endogenously based on demand. In other words,
firms set product (wine) prices to maximize profits: when
products do not sell, prices decrease, and when the demand for a
product is high, prices are adjusted upward.
Because price is endogenous, the simulation begins at
reasonable starting prices and runs until prices reach equili-
brium. Price is then set and the simulation continues until the
diffusion of Stelvins also reaches market equilibrium. When the
wineries have formed their alliance to spread the gospel of
screw caps, the consumers’ Stelvin partworths are altered on the
basis of (1) the number of Stelvin product offerings considered
in the choice set, (2) positive word of mouth by other
consumers, and (3) the impact of alliance advertising. These
components are captured in the rate of change, ρ(ϕ):
q/ðÞ ¼ ec
1 þ ec ; where; ð5Þ
c ¼ C þ vstel/C0 wineriesntðÞ stel/C0 wineries
þ vconsumer/C0 networkntðÞ consumer/C0 networkþvadvntðÞ alliance/C0 firms
ð6Þ
The n(t)s change every iteration as driven by the number of
wineries using Stelvins and the number of consumers in an
agent's network that have adopted the Stelvin. The model
assumes that the constants are non-negative. This assures that
ρ(ϕ) is bounded at (0, 1) and increases with increasing
marketing activities. Eq. (6) allows c to increase or decrease;
c might decrease if consumers again prefer corks to Stelvin
closures. An alternative model might set the partworths
constant. A suitable modification of Eq. (6) can accomplish
this. The next section presents the computational model based
on the HFM described above and explains how conjoint
analysis results can be used to validate this model.
3. Computational model
The purpose of this agent-based model is to gain insights into
how coopetition strategies can affect the diffusion of Stelvin
wine bottle closures (a resistant innovation). The model utilizes
two different types of interacting agents: wineries and
consumers. Each period, the wineries determine the price,
852 R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

production levels, and product attributes based on customer
demand. Similarly, each period the consumers purchase the
products manufactured by the wineries on the basis of their
individual preferences. A generalized causal model, as shown in
Fig. 1 , demonstrates the sequence of how the two types of
agents, wineries and consumers, interact with each other. A
seven-step process summarizes these interactions:
Step 1. Agents (wineries and consumers) are initialized with
heterogeneous characteristics as determined by the conjoint
results.
Step 2. Wineries decide whether to join an alliance of
wineries that exclusively produces wines with Stelvin closures
and markets these products jointly with their competitors.
Step 3. Wineries produce wines with attributes based on
market demand and membership in the alliance.
Step 4. Consumers randomly choose a set of wineries from
which to evaluate product offerings. Networking with other
consumers (word of-mouth) and winery advertisements can also
increase a consumer's preference for Stelvin closures.
Step 5. Consumers purchase wine based on individual utility
maximization of product choices. If no wine is found to provide
sufficient utility, the consumer does not make a purchase. If the
purchase choice includes a Stelvin closure, the consumer has
adopted the innovation.
Step 6. Market share is calculated. Wineries record sales and
inventory any unsold wine. Stored wine is available for future
periods, but wineries incur holding costs. The goal of the
wineries is to maximize profit through meeting customer
demand while minimizing inventory. Profit maximization is
accomplished by first adjusting prices and then by adjusting
production levels.
Profit maximizing wineries adjust the price of their offerings
based on how much unsold stock remained at the end of the
month. Excess stock results in lowered prices; depleted stock
results in higher prices. (See Fig. 3 for an illustration of the
rapidity with which the price equilibrium is obtained.) Under
fairly general conditions, this iterative procedure finds the price
equilibrium (fixed point) as a function of model parameters. In
this paper, the authors provide no formal proof that price
equilibria exist or that prices are uniquely determined for the
markets modeled. By using different initial conditions, how-
ever, the simulations suggest that the prices converge to
equilibria and appear to be unique. The authors make no claims
regarding the existence or uniqueness of market simulations
based on different assumptions or structure. Based on price
equilibrium, wineries are then permitted to change their
production levels to maximize profits. After approximately
24 months (or iterations in this model), the demand for screw
caps begins to reach an equilibrium.
To simulate an alliance, 27 randomly selected wineries were
designated members. Allian ce members use only Stelvin
closures and jointly conduct an advertising campaign to educate
the consumer on the benefits of screw cap closures. The
members of the alliance share the costs of the campaign,
decreasing their short-term profits. As the marketing campaign
is initiated, consumers ’ conjoint partworths are adjusted as
described in Eqs. (5) and (6).
The authors simulated the model with the aid of Netlogo (v3)
(1999). Those interested in the structure and simulation results
of the model can obtain a review from the first author upon
request. Having described the basic underpinnings of the model,
the following section will give a description of the steps taken
towards model validation, including the use of conjoint analysis
to calibrate the model.
3.1. Calibration of the New Zealand wine industry AMM
A wide range of parameter settings can be used to initialize
an AMM. Knowing which initialization parameters to use is
often a conundrum for agent-based modelers. Some, but not all,
parameter settings lead to patterns of industry evolution that, in
effect, replicate the episode modeled. One method of parameter
instantiation is to use the empirical results from quantitative
data collection. Instantiation (a term used by Java programmers)
is synonymous with the creation or initialization of a model
used to realize an abstraction (in this case, the real-world). This
study used conjoint analysis results to instantiate the simulation
in order to realistically model consumer choice decisions.
Partworths, as determined from a conjoint study, were used to
initialize consumers’ preferences, and thus, provided a platform
for model calibration. An explanation on how this was
accomplished follows the brief description of the conjoint
data collection given next.
The study recruited 2255 leading edge wine consumers from
the US, Australia, and New Zealand to complete a conjoint
web-based survey. The 1203 respondents from the US, 667
from Australia, and 385 from New Zealand were subscribers to
wine-related e-newsletters and were considered knowledgeable
about wines. In this study, the focus is only on the New Zealand
(NZ) data. The conjoint design included five features at four
levels each (see Fig. 4 ):
• Closure type: traditional cork, synthetic cork, Metacork ™
(closure combining a screw cap and a cork), screw cap.
• Type of wine: dry white, aromatic white, dry red, blush red.
• Origin of wine: New Zealand/Australia, France, Sonoma/
Napa, Chile/Argentina.
Fig. 3. Price adjustments. Netlogo output.
853R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

• Vintner type: small boutique, mid-size region winery, large
nationally recognized winery, international conglomerate
winery.
• Price: $7, $12, $20, $25 in the respondents ’ currency (e.g.,
New Zealand dollars).
Each respondent completed two separate conjoint tasks by
indicating their wine purchase preferences for an informal and a
formal occasion. Accordingly, this resulted in 770 different
responses. The survey results showed that New Zealand
consumers have equal preferences for Stelvins and natural
cork closures. On average, the respondents preferred red wines
to white wines and preferred wines from regional and boutique
wineries to international conglomerates. These consumers
preferred wine from their home country. Questions in addition
to conjoint queries revealed that the respondents relied on wine-
related periodicals and wine-related functions to gather knowl-
edge about wines. The methodology and detailed results of this
study are reported in Toubia, Hauser, and Garcia (2006) and
Garcia and Atkin (2005) .
Consumer agents were assigned partworths only for two of
the four wine-type attribute levels (red wine/white wine), two
closure attribute levels (screw cap/cork), two wine origin
attribute levels (NZ-AUS/US), all four levels of winery-type
(boutique, regional, national, international) and price ($7, $12,
$20, $25). These levels were chosen in order to focus on the
stylized facts of interest and to simplify the model. The conjoint
study measured conditional choice and therefore did not include
a none-alternative ( Orme, 2005 ). The AMM, instead, included
the none-alternative choice of no wine purchase. To set this
choice of none, the least preferred choice of the agent was
calculated to find a minimum threshold for which a purchase
would be made. Consumer agents purchase wine only when this
threshold utility is exceeded.
To instantiate the wineries the following parameters were
assigned: (1) type of wine (red or white), (2) region of winery
(US or Australia/New Zealand), and (3) type of winery
(boutique, etc.). To simplify model validation steps, each type
of winery only produced wines at a single price. Thus, boutiques
offered products at a starting price of $25; regional wineries
priced at $20; national wineries priced at $12; international
wineries priced at $7. During the first few iterations of a model
run, these initial prices are adjusted to reach price equilibrium, as
explained above.
Conjoint analysis results defined the winery parameters. For
example, the first setting to instantiate was the percentage
distribution of each type of winery in the marketspace
(boutique, regional, national, international). The first-choice
rule based on the conjoint results indicated that 4.4% of the NZ
respondents preferred boutique wines, 23.9% preferred regional
wines, 44.7% preferred national wines and 22.8% preferred
international wines. These percentages do not add up to 100%
because 4.2% of the respondents were indifferent with respect
to two different types of wineries. This small difference did not
influence the model outcomes and therefore is not considered in
model instantiation. These percentages formed the basis for
setting the initial distribution of types of wineries.
The winery-type instantiation, however, is not complete
until the model is calibrated. Using sensitivity tests, the study
evaluated how prices would change based on changing the
ratio of different types of wineries. Starving the market of the
most commonly preferred wine (national) would drive the
wine's price up and consequently glut the marketspace with
less preferred options. The goal of this step in the calibration
process was to adjust the percentages until the equilibrium
prices sufficiently matched real-world prices for these types of
wines. Industry partners provided real-world prices for NZ
wines. Table 1 shows the starting allocation percentages
Fig. 4. Conjoint Design (from Toubia, et. al., 2006 ).
854 R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

initialized during instantia tion and the final allocation
percentages as determined during model calibration. The
table also shows the final price points reached after
equilibrium.
The percentage of red wine versus white wine produced by
the wineries is set in a similar manner. Table 1 shows the initial
percentages of red and white wine determined through the
conjoint results and the final calibrated percentage of red-to-
white wine production obtained through sensitivity testing. For
example, first-choice rule results showed that 58% of the
respondents preferred red wine over white wine; sensitivity
analysis resulted in a model setting of 55% red wine production
and a 45% white wine production. The percentage of
Australian/New Zealand wineries versus US-based wineries
also needed to be set for the model. Although preferences for
French and South American wines were also collected in the
conjoint study, they were excluded from the analyses to simplify
the model because partworth evaluations showed that New
Zealand respondents had the least preferences for these types of
wines. First-choice rule results showed that 92% of New
Zealand respondents preferred Australian/New Zealand wines
to US wines. Sensitivity analyses confirmed this setting for the
model.
To summarize the instantiation and calibration method,
conjoint partworth results were used to instantiate overall
consumer preferences and the first-choice rule was used to
calibrate their initial settings using sensitivity analyses to
replicate stylized facts. Table 1 shows that after calibrating these
three parameters (types of winery, region of winery, red –white
wine), 5% of the wineries were boutique wineries that produced
55% red wines and 45% white wines. Of these boutique
wineries, 92% were Australian/New Zealand wineries and 8%
were US wineries.
Additional parameters set were the number of wineries in the
marketspace and the production level of each winery.
Sensitivity analyses led to a model with 52 wineries in a
marketspace of 770 consumers. In order to increase the
probability of including a boutique winery in the selection
process, which was limited to 3 out of the 52 wineries,
consumers evaluated 16 different wineries when selecting a
wine to purchase. Production levels were initially set to be equal
among the 52 wineries.
The next step was to verify the model's face validity by
evaluating a baseline model that excluded alliance member-
ships, advertising, and word of-mouth impacts. This allowed for
the examination of model sensitivities by setting the micro
variables (agent characteristics driven by the empirical data)
constant and observing how well the macro-environmental
variables match the true marketplace (for example, the market
share of Stelvins, red wines, white wines, etc.). When the
simulations do not replicate the known facts about the macro
system as revealed in the empirical data, adjustments to the
model's parameters are required. Macro-level results that do not
match the known empirical data require a re-calibration of the
model.
Initially, the percentage of Stelvin-closed wines was
arbitrarily set at 10%. After reaching initial price equilibrium,
wineries were permitted to adjust their production level of
Stelvins based on their overall market share. Wineries produced
Stelvin-closed wines to maximize their profits based on market
demand. The conjoint analysis first-choice rule showed that
55% of the New Zealand respondents preferred Stelvin closures
to cork closures. Thus, in model verification, market share of
Stelvins needed to reach 55% without any exogenous shocks to
the model in order to achieve the calibration goal. The results
show ( Fig. 5 ) that the market share of Stelvins reached 53.5%
(based on 50 runs of 50 iterations each, or 2500 total iterations).
This simulation output (53.5%) adequately matched the
Fig. 5. Pre-alliance market penetration. Netlogo ouput: average of 50 runs of 50
iterations.
Table 1
Initial and final model settings
Type of winery
Initialization a Model setting b
Boutique 4% 5%
Regional 24% 18%
National 45% 39%
International 27% 38%
Type of wine
Initialization c Model setting d
Red wine (boutiques) 58% 55%
Red wine (regional) 59% 60%
Red wine (national) 59% 60%
Red wine (international) 59% 60%
Region of wine
Initialization e Model setting f
Australian/New Zealand 92% 92%
US 8% 8%
Price of wine
Initialization g Model setting h
Boutique (high priced) $25.00 $21.50
Regional (mid-high priced) $20.00 $17.50
National (mid priced) $12.00 $11.50
International (low priced) $7.00 $5.00
a Based on conjoint first-choice rule when evaluating type of winery at set
price.
b After verification.
c Based on conjoint first-choice rule when evaluating red versus white wine.
d After verification.
e Based on conjoint first-choice rule when evaluating AUS/NZ vs. US.
f After verification.
g Based on conjoint attribute levels.
h After price equilibrium achieved (approximately 24 iterations [months]).
855R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

conjoint results (55%), which led to the conclusion that this
important test of model calibration and face validity had been
successful.
4. The simulation results
This study proposes that a strategy of coopetition served as
an instrument to diffuse the Stelvin amongst resistant
consumers in the New Zealand wine industry. The authors
collected the data for this study in 2004, three years after the
formation of the Wine Seal Initiative in New Zealand. The study
therefore does not present actual pre-alliance Stelvin market
share and diffusion results. Instead, for illustration purposes, the
data gathered in 2004 drove the pre-alliance market equilibrium
and was used to simulate subsequent market results. Thousands
of test runs were conducted to establish face, parameter, and
process validity as dictated by the empirical results of the
conjoint study.
By allowing price (as well as advertising and production
levels) to be set endogenously by rational agents (wineries) in
response to economic decisions made by consumer agents (buy
what and from whom), the model begins each run with a burn-in
period until prices reach a pre-alliance equilibrium. In
oligopolistic competition, wineries make myopic marketshare-
maximizing decisions to introduce Stelvins. Only after both
price and production equilibrium are reached, do alliance effects
come into play in the model. The results in Fig. 5 show market
penetration when no alliances are formed and the consumers ’
partworths are not allowed to change (no effect of word of
mouth or advertising). The results show that at approximately
t = 30, the market becomes saturated and the Stelvin market
share reaches only 53%, as dictated by the consumers ’
partworths.
Fig. 6 demonstrates how market penetration changes when
alliances are formed. This figure shows that the market share for
Stelvins has increased to 76.5% and the diffusion is 97.6% (all
consumers have bought at least one Stelvin-closed product).
This is consistent with actual marketplace response four years
after the alliance formation; in New Zealand approximately
80% of wines are bottled with Stelvins ( Sogg, 2005 ). In the
model, the primary factor that changes consumer awareness and
preference for Stelvins is advertising by the alliance firms. Word
of mouth can also positively (or negatively) impact adoption, as
consumer agents communicate with one another based on a
small-world structure ( Watts and Strogatz, 1998 ), thereby
stimulating (or inhibiting) the diffusion of Stelvins.
Early results of this model indicate that the size of the
alliance (number of firms committed to screw caps) can
significantly affect the rate of diffusion of the screw cap.
These findings support the qualitative data collected from New
Zealand wineries, indicating that at least a dozen committed
wineries were necessary to get the ball rolling. A minimum
number of alliance members seem to be necessary to spread
advertising and media expenditures across members and obtain
economies of scale in bottling costs. The model also suggests
that if an alliance is too large, winery's profits of those in the
membership will be lower because supply exceeds demand. In
this case, more sales go to wineries that remained committed to
cork closures. Later, wineries not in the alliance can free-ride on
the Stelvin-coalition's initial investments. Continued analyses
are planned to explore the profit impact of competition versus
coopetition.
5. Summary
This study outlined the levels necessary to validate agent-
based marketing models (AMMs) and demonstrated a history-
friendly model (HFM) approach ( Malerba et al., 1999 ) that
incorporates qualitative and quantitative data to create a real-
world replication of an episodic event in the New Zealand wine
industry. Research showed how conjoint data results could be
used to instantiate, calibrate, and verify an AMM to achieve
model validation. Conjoint data provides a grounding founda-
tion for instantiating the model, which naturally lends itself to
guiding calibration and verification.
Two important conclusions of this study are that AMM
instantiation can be set with conjoint partworths and the
conjoint first-choice rule can be used to calibrate initial model
settings. When a model's results match the results of the first-
choice rule for consumer preferences, a modeler can feel more
confident that model calibration is complete. When verification
replicates stylized facts on a macro-level, the model is one step
closer to validation. Because conjoint data results are mean-
ingful on an individual level as well as on an aggregate level this
type of empirical data collection lends itself nicely to AMMs.
Empirical results that are reported on an aggregate level (such as
regression analyses) are less suitable for grounding an AMM.
The next step in the model is harmonization. Calibration and
verification are not substitutes for harmonization, nor do they
guarantee accurate predictions. For details on how to conduct
harmonization, refer to Carley (1996) .
Early model results of the HFM indicate that diffusion can
stagnate with a resistant innovation, such as screw cap closures
on high-end wines. Exogenous forces, such as coalitions, are
required to move the consumers ’ preferences away from the
status quo. One method of moving consumers ’ preferences is
through coopetition, where competing wineries cooperated to
jointly promote the benefits of the screw cap to a resistant
marketplace. Early results show that an alliance of too few
wineries will not cause the necessary shock to the marketplace
Fig. 6. Post-alliance market penetration. Netlogo output: average of 50 runs of
50 iterations.
856 R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857

and an alliance of too many wineries dilutes the message,
resulting in loss of profits and market share for all wineries in
the alliance.
References
Bourne P . Taint necessarily so. Gourmet Traveller (January 2000); 2000.
p. 30 –1.
Brandenburger AM, Nalebuff BJ. Coopetition: A Revolution Mindset That
Combines Competition and Cooperation: The Game Theory Strategy That's
Changing the Game of Business. New York: Doubleday; 1996.
Carley KM. Group stability: a socio-cognitive approach. In: Lawler E,
Markovsky B, Ridgeway C, Walker H, editors. Advances in Group
Processes: Theory and Research, vol. VII. Greenwhich, CT: JAI Press;
1990. p. 1 –44.
Carley KM. V alidating computational models. Working Paper Carnegie Mellon
University; 1996.
Conway RW. Some tactical problems in digital simulation. Manage Sci 1963;10
(1):47–61.
Courtney S. The history and revival of screw caps. Wine of the Week (August,
2001); 2001. http://www.wineoftheweek.com/screwcaps/history.html (Last
viewed May 12, 2006).
Fagiolo G, Moneta A, Windrum P . Empirical validation of agent-based models:
A critical survey. International Workshop on Agent-Based Modeling and
Economic Policy Design. Germany: University of Bielefeld; 2005.
Garcia R, Atkin T. Coopetition for the Diffusion of Resistant Innovations: A
Case Study in the Global Wine Industry. Northeastern University Institute
for Global Innovation Management Working Paper 2005;vol. 05 –002.
Garraffo F. Types of coopetition to manage emerging technologies. Conference
Proceedings of the European Academy of Management. Stockholm; 2002.
Gomes-Casseres B. The Alliance Revolution. Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press; 1996.
Harbison JR, Pekar Jr P . Smart Alliances. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 1998.
Hart A, Kleinig A. The role of oxygen in the aging of bottled wine. The
Australian and New Zealand Wine Industry Journal 2005;vol. 20(2):46 –50.
Jorde TM, Teece DJ. Competition and cooperation: striking the right balance.
Calif Manage Rev 1989;31(3):25 –37.
Kennedy RC, Xiang X, Madey GR, Cosimano TF. V erification and validation of
scientific and economic models. Agent2005 Conference Proceedings.
Chicago, IL, October 2005; 2005.
Knepell PL, Arangno DC. Simulation validation: A confidence assessment
methodology. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press; 1993.
LeBaron, B. Agent-based computational finance. In: Tesfatsion L, Judd K,
editors. Handbook of Computational Economics. New York: North-Holland;
in press.
Levitt RE, Cohen GP , Kunz JC, Nass CI, Tore C, Y an J. The virtual design team:
Simulating how organisation structure and information processing tools
affect team performance. In: Carley KM, Prietula MJ, editors. Computa-
tional Organization Theory. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates;
1994. p. 1 –18.
Madey G, Freeh V , Tynan R. Agent-based modeling of open source using
swarm. 8th Americas Conference of Information Systems; 2002.
Malerba F, Orsenigo L. Innovation and market structure in the dynamics of the
pharmaceutical industry and biotechnology: towards a history-friendly
model. Ind Corp Change 2002;11(4):667 –703.
Malerba F, Nelson R, Orsenigo L, Winter S. History-friendly ’ models of
industry evolution: the computer industry. Ind Corp Change 1999;8
(1):3–40.
Murray W, Lockshin L. Consumer acceptance of synthetic corks. Int J Wine
Mark 1997;9(1):31–52.
NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University; 1999. http://ccl.northwestern.
edu/netlogo.
New Zealand Grape and Wine Industry Statistical Annual 2005. http://www.
nzwine.com/ (last viewed March 25, 2006).
Orme BK. Getting Started with Conjoint Analysis. Madison, WI USA: Research
Publishers; 2005.
Sogg D. The science of closures: evaluating corks, twist-offs and other ways of
preserving the quality of bottled wine. Wine Spect 2005;28(17):55 –8.
Stone M. Cross-validation and multinomial prediction. Biometrika 1994;61
(3):509–15.
Toubia O, Hauser JR, Garcia R. Generalized polyhedral methods for adaptive
choice-based conjoint analysis: Theory and Application. IGIM Working
Paper; 2006. March 2006.
Watts DJ, Strogatz SH. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature
1998;393(6684):440–2.
Werker C, Brenner T. Empirical calibration of simulation models. Papers on
Economics and Evolution, vol. 0410. Jena: Max Planck Institute for
Research into Economic Systems; 2004.
857R. Garcia et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 848 –857
